The Project Gutenberg EBook of Verrocchio, by Hans Mackowsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Verrocchio

Author: Hans Mackowsky

Editor: Hermann Knackfuß

Release Date: November 30, 2020 [EBook # 63924]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VERROCCHIO ***




Produced by Peter Becker, Reiner Ruf, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






  ################################################# ##################

                     Notes on the transcription

    The present text was based on the book edition published in 1901
    reproduced as faithfully as possible. Typographic
    Errors were tacitly corrected. Unusual and
    ancient spellings remain compared to the original
    unchanged; Quotes in foreign languages ​​were not corrected.

    Some pictures were moved between the paragraphs and to
    Part grouped accordingly so as not to impair the flow of text.

    The original was set in Gothic script. Special
    Font styles were created using the following special characters
    marked:

        Underlined: _Underlined_
        Bold: = equal sign =
        locked: + plus sign +
        Antiqua: ~ Tilden ~

  ################################################# ##################




                          Lover editions

                            [Illustration]




                         Artist monographs

                Issued in association with others

                                  from

                              H. Snapfoot


                                  LII

                              Verrocchio


                       = Bielefeld = and = Leipzig =
                     Published by Velhagen & Klasing

                                 1901




                              Verrocchio

                                  From

                            Hans Mackowsky

     With 80 illustrations after paintings, drawings and sculptures.

                            [Illustration]


                       = Bielefeld = and = Leipzig =
                     Published by Velhagen & Klasing

                                 1901




This work is particularly luxurious for lovers and friends
equipped books except for this edition

_a numbered edition_

of which only 50 copies are on extra art paper
are made. Each copy is carefully numbered in the press
(from 1-50) and tied in a rich leather strap. The price
such a copy is 20 M. A reprint of the numbered
Edition that every bookstore accepts orders for will not
organized.

    The publishing company.


Printed by Fischer & Wittig in Leipzig.




Content.


                                                                   page

       I. The judgment of posterity 3

      II. The environment 4

     III. External living conditions. Appearance and shape 8

      IV. Education, apprenticeship and first works 13

       V. David 19

      VI. The Medicigrabmal 26

     VII. The boy with the dolphin 34

    VIII. Minor work for the Medici. Busts. Reliefs.
            Wax figures. Verrocchio as a restorer of antiquity
            and party decorator 40

      IX. Madonnas 52

       X. The grave of honor of Cardinal Forteguerri 55

      XI. The marble relief from the tomb of Francesca Tornabuoni. -
            The silver relief on the St. John's Altar 60

     XII. Christ and Thomas at Or San Michele 65

    XIII. The equestrian monument of Colleoni 70

     XIV. Paintings and drawings 76

      XV. The school. Leonardo da vinci 95




[Illustration: + Andrea del Verrocchio. +

(Woodcut in the second edition of Vasari's artist biographies
from the year 1568.)]




Verrocchio.




I.


The fame that an artist enjoys is solely decisive for his own
Worth and talent? The name that is repeated over and over is the safest
Guarantee for the size of the vanished championship? And gives
only the stately number of widely visible works to an artist violence
and continue to work into the future? As soon as these and similar questions
are raised, Verrocchio falls short of the requirements that
one puts back to the artist of the highest rank and growth. Be
Name does not echo through the centuries with the same ore sound,
that separate us from him; the crowd of his admirers is not like that
peoples' congregation swelled like the most glorious
unmistakably crowded. And even if one of his not exactly
numerous works that Colleoni enjoys the undisputed fame that
to be the most beautiful equestrian monument in the world, that was it for this work
not reserved to be a role model and model for future generations
become.

To the unreachable who sat at the tables of plenty
Verrocchio doesn't belong. But neither is he one of those who are only the
Thanks to faithful scientific research for a painstakingly preserved existence.
Goethe occasionally calls him “a thinking, thoroughly theoretical
well-founded man "and has, without having approached the master,
with these words probably captured the impression that one had at the time
associated with the name Verrocchio. First the understanding of our day
Verrocchio also benefited the masters of the Quattrocento.
But this revaluation happened too quickly, and the newly awakened one
Enthusiasm made itself felt with an overly high assessment of the
Artist's air. The understandable desire, the humble life's work of
by no means fruitful artist of the newly won valuation of his
Increasing talent accordingly drew works of art into the circle of
Contemplation that is only of suggestion, not Verrocchio's own hand
owe their existence. The opposition has overzealous opposition
raised and distorted the image of the master into small things, like those in the
Formless had increased. So there are judgments
which ultimately only prove how far you can go from the untroubled
Knowledge of the nature of the Master is removed. The way there too
reached, Wilhelm Bode, the most deserving of all, had years ago
Researcher on Verrocchio, directed; "It is, it says with him,
To isolate Verrocchio from the wavering and indistinct ensemble
the work of his workshop in order to characterize his own. "

His very own! But the versatility of the artist does that
first steps unsafe and dangerous. We are inadequate about him
informed. We only know that he sculpted and painted,
that he was the goldsmith and the study of perspective as well
who cultivated music. If we can trust Vasari, it was Verrocchio
generally more inclined to study things than to production, and
Goethe would have it better than anyone with the thinking, absolutely
theoretically based man characterized.

[Illustration: Fig. 1. Lorenzo di Credi. + Portrait of Andrea del
Verrocchio. +

Florence, Uffizi Gallery.]

Let us now consider the small number of certain works of his
skillful, deliberate and sensitive hand, we almost have
only works of sculpture before us. And by ourselves
We shall familiarize ourselves with the form and content of these works
get so clear ideas of the peculiarity of their master that
we also in the area of ​​the others, demonstrably cultivated by him
Arts hope to recognize one's property. From the thinking, absolutely
theoretically founded man becomes the
Artist gradually grow up, who, by the power of his talent
raised beyond the limits of the century, prepared the way and
made the path right for the greater ones who came after him.
Apart from Donatello and Quercia, there was no other in the Quattrocento
Quattrocentist like Verrocchio. Compared to them, it lacks
Art the timeless, the eternal. But with success he has the tradition
overcome, nothing conventional clings to it. Any task given to him
was placed, he has freely out of his artistic feeling,
solved without looking after a model. Everything is pressing with him
already on the Cinquecento. How he started the new century with his own
Eyes was not allowed to look, so he is also in line with his art
the threshold, in the forecourt. He points over with a gesture like in
the images of the time of John, the forerunner of Christ, of the Savior
indicates. And the stronger who came after him, in whose world fame the
more modest Verrocchios rose, was his own pupil and
Assistant to Leonardo da Vinci.




II.


At the time Verrocchio's talent was developing, that appears
artistic life in Florence more colorful and eventful than in the first
Decades of the fifteenth century. The bearers of the artistic
Thoughts are of course considerably smaller than that
Conquering family, that of the early Renaissance the decisive victories
won. Brunelleschi has already retired, Donatello is staying in
Northern Italy, LB Alberti lives, devoted to theoretical studies, in
Rome. Ghiberti, greatly aged, is near the grave.

In 1452, the so-called
Gates of Paradise at the Florentine Baptistery and show the new one
picturesque relief style combined with a goldsmith-like clean
Detail treatment. That may appear in the frame of the door
earliest example of the naturalistic arabesque emerged
from the idealization of the high festivities at the church doors
usual decoration. In S. Croce, the Florentine pantheon,
become the grave monuments of Leonardo Bruni and Carlo Marzuppini
built. In them the organic is revealed for the first time
Combination of ancient and naturalistic elements, the more serious
Bernardo Rossellino approaches more ancient form, the more imaginative
Desiderio da Settignano his naturalistic feeling more freely
leaves. In the delicacy of the relief treatment with the lightened
Shadows, in the use of different colored stones, make themselves felt
clearly the pursuit of a painterly effect and coloristic charm
valid. The colored terracottas of Luca della Robbia, the colorful
painted clay figures and stucco reliefs that were popular around the same time
clearly reveal the value that was attached to polychromy.
With regard to the material, the ore was in the highest esteem,
not only because of the proximity and the abundance of the marble quarries
Stone would have devalued at all, but because bronze is the greater
technical skill required, the delicacy of the form down to the
finest offshoots and especially in the delightful game
of light and dark, created by gilding and patination in the
Opposites could be exacerbated, the pursuit of painterly
Effect excellent. Since the last with Ghiberti in 1455
living grandmasters of bronze casting showed up
the younger generation is trying to force what the liquid,
but hard-to-tame ore would have done better and purer. The
The crowd of lucky heirs followed the conquerors of a new style
to discover, expand, expand with an insatiable joy,
with the most skilled hands in the world, with a limitless one
A desire for combinations and an abundance of delicate ideas.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. + Madonna enthroned with St. Laurentius and
the St. Georg + bronze plaque. Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

You felt so firm and secure on the newly acquired land that
close to the golden tree of life with its ever wider
spreading branches could also take root the gray theory.
The question of the primacy of the arts, which seems insignificant today,
in particular the competition between painting and sculpture,
currently filled all workshops and study rooms with persistent
Noise and found an echo in all art theory
Writings that came to light in long succession. Already Ghiberti
confessed that his love belonged to the greater part of the art of painting;
LB Alberti admits to painting by showing her position and
Appreciation from the vaunted elderly with a great effort
investigated in historical learning, the noblest rank
among all arts one. Filarete recognizes that the sculpture does
is more difficult to practice than painting, since it is less important to the artist
the opportunity to correct oneself is offered by nature too
come extremely close, but painting is "nature itself".
Later, Leonardo also raised the heatedly disputed question in favor of the
Painting decided, and one thing was needed so completely in the plastic
Form rooting genius like Michelangelo's and the excavation of the
colorless Roman antiquities, in order to sculpture the hitherto from painting
to grant the place of honor held.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. + Grave slab of Cosimo de 'Medici. +

Florence, San Lorenzo.]

And yet the Florentines were ahead of all other Italian tribes
by nature for the reliable capture of the plastic form more than
gifted for coloring, and her painting has certainly adapted to the
always developing leading plastic. Without Donatello there are painters
like Fra Filippo, Paolo Uccello, Andrea del Castagno, also Botticelli
and Ghirlandajo unthinkable. The generation, the Verrocchio
listens, seeks to practically mediate the competition between the arts.
Engage the most enterprising, energetic and gifted
in several areas of the performing arts to meet their ambitions
satisfy, or seek, with varying degrees of luck, those in the plastic
to utilize the results obtained for painting. The experiment will
under certain circumstances, an end in itself and the best are subject to them
often the danger of the work and technical tinkering
affect its preservation. This group is called by
Artists, whose most distinctive character is Antonio del Pollajuolo
has to apply with the name of the painter-sculptor, but includes the word
sometimes too little. They can rightly be called the versatile
in contrast to the all-rounders, on whose achievements theirs
Efforts are based, and to the one-sided who in their art only that
practice the relevant guild craft according to their abilities. The
Versatile, insofar as they are artists, means depicting nature
the relentless rendering of what is clearly and soberly seen
into the details. But they don't just want to look, they want to
fathom, imitate lawfully. The doctor is in them all
Body. And because they are clever Florentines, not soft, dreamy ones
Venetians, do they often dwell longer on the scientific problem,
more insistent and stubborn than it would be for her art practice
rewarded. Your perspective studies expand under the
Participation of deeply learned mathematicians in geometric spatial analysis
the most difficult construction, their study of the naked penetrates to the top
to the limit, which later the anatomists with knife and scissors
exceed. They research and brood. The calls from the gardens
of life they respond with defensive serenity, like Paolo
Uccello to the wife waiting in the bedchamber from his nocturnal
Study table calls over: What a lovely thing this is
Perspective!

[Illustration: Fig. 4. + David. + Bronze. Florence, Museo Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 5. + head of David. + Bronze. Florence, Museo
Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Such an artistically and theoretically crystallizing
Verrocchio's fate has shown the world. With the described
He shares all peculiarities, a gift, with kindred spirits and convictions
meanwhile, which they all lack, lifts his person significantly from the
Cooperative out: a purified sense of beauty. And that this
took over the leading voice in the harmony of his abilities,
often increases his art to the level of unrestricted mastery.




III.


The surname del Verrocchio suggests no particular merit in this
artistic organism of the master, such as the sharp
captivating look; there is no nickname in the epithet.
Our artist is also not one of the members of the
Documents of the time often mentioned Verrocchi family.
Rather, he put the surname in grateful memory of his
Teacher, the goldsmith Giuliano de 'Verrocchi. His family,
the Cioni are to be found in a very modest middle class.
His father, Michele, a brick maker, had on his
in the old days took up the more convenient occupation of a toll collector.
He was past fifty when Mona Gemma gave him his son
Andrea gave birth. The year is not quite certain; contrary to the general
Valid assumption is based on the master's cadastral entries in 1436
as the year of birth. Grew up with four sisters and two brothers
Andrea on under the care of his stepmother Nannina after the
own mother died soon after his birth; to the household
also belonged to Mona Ghita, the grandmother. The relationship to the
Stepmother seems to have remained a warm and untroubled
at least she has Andrea with her after her father's death in 1452
keep in the house. We are interested in the older of the siblings
Sister Mona Tita, who married a barber, and their children,
two daughters and a son who lived in Verrocchio's house; then a
younger brother, Tommaso, a cloth weaver, whose poverty is numerous
Verrocchio's progeny sometimes fell hard.

We learn almost nothing about external life events. in the
The year of his father's death, 1452, the misfortune struck our artist,
that he was playing with his peers outside the gates with one
unfortunate stone throwing a wool worker fatally. The court
stepped in, but acquitted the negligent. His teenage years are
filled in with theoretical studies; he brought particular zeal
Against geometry. At the same time he took care of the music, probably already
as a child, as was the custom of the time. He learned sounds
beat and recite, with the main purpose of the then
pursued musical instruction: the organ rich and capable of modulation
close. In vain, however, would we imagine
of the scope of his musical talent and activity.

Then the apprenticeship approaches him. Florence has always been home
the goldsmiths who have their stalls, one close to the other, on the
Ponte vecchio had opened. The great masters had before him
all started in the goldsmith's workshop; Verrocchio also attacked
first of all to this craft, which also nourishes his master well
promised. But one activity alone was enough for the young man's ambition
Artist not. So he did painting and architecture, wood carving and
Perspective. He must have romped around in that circle of
Theorists who like Baldovinetti and Pollajuolo as their leaders
looked up.

It was not until the sixties that light came into the semi-darkness of this
Artist life. Verrocchio enters into close relations with the
ruling family of the Medici, and now he soon shines younger
Fame. He is also active for the Rucellai; in that by Marcotti
famous Zibaldone by Giovanni Rucellai are several
Unfortunately, Verrocchio's work for the family has no further description of the
Item listed.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. + David. +

(Photo in the correct view after the plaster cast.)]

More and more he grows together with his workshop. We don't hear from anyone
public appearance, no quarrel with an adversary robs him of the
Quiet to work, no voluntary work affects the well applied
Hours of his days. The storms that rush through his time
break on the walls of this workshop, hardly that the noise of the
Pazziv conspiracy, which was nevertheless to the Giuliano de '
Medici cost his life, shooing him away from work for a moment.
But this work is not a regular artistic production.
Verrocchio loves inventing, tinkering and tinkering. All sorts of things
Experiments, e.g. B. Shaping above nature in a soft,
pulverized stone mass, which is similar to plaster, take its time.
Occasionally we marvel at the number of years that his work has
standing around in the workshop. Because as carefully as he carries out, so rich
he designs the individual, the time he needs to complete,
is not always in proportion to the scope of the service.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. + Old pedestal for the David of Verrocchio. +

(The bust, added later, represents the Grand Duke Ferdinand I of
Tuscany.) Florence, Palazzo vecchio.]

Vasari would like to stay in Florence for most of his life
Verrocchios fills up, interrupting with a visit to Rome. Sixtus IV.
is said to have called our artist to the papal court so that he could
make twelve statues of the apostles for the Sistine Chapel. But in the
The name Verrocchios appears in the account books of the papal curia
nowhere, and we know the goldsmiths and silversmiths, the Sixtus'
Enjoyed favor, as much as the sculptors. Added to that is that
Vasari also allegedly in Rome regarding another of Verrocchio's
manufactured work, the Tornabuoni dig, has been proven to be wrong, so
that we have to deny the artist's stay there.

Only in the last few years of his relatively short life did
he the dome of his hometown, probably with a heavy heart like all his
Compatriots, lost sight. Happy years were for him in Venice
not decided. With the erection of the equestrian monument there
for the condottiere Colleoni there were manifold insults,
Jealousies and rivalries that go beyond death
Master should affect his artistic property.
Whether these frictions the self-conscious and, it seems, easy
Vulnerable people have broken earlier than one might expect
remain open. He died in Venice in 1488, probably briefly
Time after the last contract with King Matthias Corvinus von
Hungary, for whom he was supposed to work a well (August 27, 1488);
because already in October of the same year mentioned his favorite student
Lorenzo di Credi the master as deceased. Contrary to his last
Will, which he drew up in June 1488, was the corpse to Florence
and buried there in the family crypt of S. Ambrogio.
But in the seventeenth century the grave was already in vain
with the simple inscription that Vasari narrates, wanted.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. + Tomb of Piero and Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, old sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by Gebr. Alinari in Florence.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 9. + Left part of the sarcophagus of Piero and
Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio remained celibate. For his loved ones he has been magnanimous
taken care of down to his Famulus Giusto. From the nieces who gave him
who ran the house in Florence, one of them still had during Verrocchio's lifetime
married an honorable dyer, the second a cooper, both of them
thanks to the dowry their uncle prescribed for them. His two houses
in the district of S. Ambrogio in Florence, one of which to one
Was rented out to the male heirs. The
the artistic legacy came to Lorenzo di Credi.

The master's appearance is in a portrait of Lorenzo
di Credi in the Uffizi Gallery (Fig. 1), its authenticity
has recently been unjustly doubted and that essentially
corresponds to the woodcut shown by Vasari (see p.
Cover photo). From the full beardless face look below steeply
arched eyebrows a pair of deeply sharp and calm eyes
Clarity, the nose is not noble, but well formed, the mouth over
the double chin finely drawn and tightly closed; from the pure,
well-rounded forehead is the light cloth cap on the half-length, in
Neck curly hair pulled back. The meaty but delicately educated
Hands rest slightly on top of each other. The double chin, the broad chest
and the short, fat arm suggest a certain plumpness
middle shape close. The one on the left side to the open window
incident light plays clearly but soberly on the forms and
Surfaces. The most prominent trait is high intelligence.
The pedantry and homely bakedness that goes with this peaceful homestead
seems peculiar to the clean but sweeping brush Credis
ascribed to the model. A pathetic increase like her
revealed in the woodcut, Credi was not capable.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. + Part of the lid from the sarcophagus of Piero and
Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

So he gave us the guild more than the artist in the picture.
And maybe those who have the painting as a self-portrait
Peruginos said they were offended by the dose of couch potatoes
it contains and which is incompatible with Verrocchio. Because Andrea wasn't
Curmudgeon and not a hermit. Nonetheless, he was a thinking artist
in love with solitude, an enemy of pomp, noise and din. In front
getting sleepy, this highest danger of all, deal with yourself
The living, kept his artistic soul of the rivalry with the capable
Comrades, the struggle of the opposing directions, the sharp criticism
of his contemporaries, in short, all those advantages that were found in the places of the
big traffic like Florence was to be found alone.




IV.


Among the most difficult problems that are problematic in this everywhere
An artist's career requires a solution, the question of which belongs
Verrocchios teacher. Older sources that Vasari verifiably knew
and used, unanimously make the artist one of the last
and Donatello's most outstanding student. But if the biographer himself
If he is completely silent about it, it comes under serious criticism
like his literary models. The joint work of the two
Artist at the basin of San Lorenzo, the Vasari in Donatello's life
is told, through Albertini's memorials, the older one
credible source, refuted. Besides, Donatello was just in the
Years in which Verrocchio's apprenticeship would have to fall from Florence
absent. And finally we hardly find one in the master's works
Train leading to Donatello. Where the object, such as the Colleoni,
challenges a comparison with Donatello, we see a conscious one
Verrocchio deviates from his presumed role model. The technical one
Donatello's clumsy bronze casting is Verrocchio's virtuoso
Treatment of the ore against the dramatically agitated mobility
Donatello's pathetic serenity of Verrocchio, the easy,
sketchy litter the deliberate, fussy, gourmet
Care. If a relationship between the two is to be determined, then may
we are most likely to stick to Pomponius Gauricus, who in
his book Verrocchio den, published in 1502 on sculpture
"Donatello's rival, but only when he was already an old man",
designated.

On the further look around for the teacher it is tempting to with
Bernardo Rossellino to linger. The boy is supposed to go to Vasari
Verrocchio the Madonna with the angels in the lunette of the Bruni tomb in
S. Croce have worked. But also here chronological and predominate
technical concerns. Leonardo Bruni, the State Secretary of the Florentines
Republic, died 1444; it is not to be assumed that one will receive the honor
the deserving statesman and historiographer of the republic
delayed. An eight or nine year old, like Verrocchio
that was, but you will not want to trust a marble Madonna,
not even if, like the one in question, they artistically deny
other parts of the tomb is inferior.

So we limit ourselves for Verrocchio, as for so many artists
in his day, then, the instruction in a goldsmith's workshop
to be accepted, namely with that Giuliano Verrocchi, the del
Migliore makes a name. Remember his later work with
their delight in clean details, their delicacy and the high
technical skill that distinguishes them from such an apprenticeship.
For what this teaching place denied him, he found sufficient
artistic inspiration in the works that arose around him, and
which has already been referred to.

The pupil of the noble blacksmith was also initially in the
learned art and that into the mature man years
into it, as Cellini expressly assures. From the samples of his
There is no longer any artistry. We only hear from two
Vessels that were well known to all goldsmiths at that time and theirs
had to boast of particular applause. One was round and
richly decorated with a leaf border, with mythical animals and others
Oddities that remained inherent in Verrocchio's decorative style
are; the second showed a putti dance, one especially since Donatello
popular motif that we can still find in the master's drawings
will deal with.

From the agraffes that the artist made for the choir skirts of the Florentine
Cathedral chapter likes a bronze plaque of the Berliner
Give museums a reasonably clear idea (Fig. 2). they
points to the ornate throne, the adjoining barriers
Peaceful like a courtyard, the Madonna is adored and assisted by angels
of St. Lawrence and St. Sebastian. The
vanishingly shallow relief proves that we only have the sample cast
have a chased plate in front of us, intended for the application of enamel. The
Scheme of composition, types and proportions are Verrocchio
peculiar, as is the richness of the folds. The pious one
The object and the round shape evoke spiritual ornamentation.
In the later service of the pompous Medici, the master becomes his
Art also came to be equipped. The silver doe that
Lorenzo 1474 on the occasion of the tournament celebrated by Polizian
in honor of the Simonetta Vespucci wore on her helmet is a work
Verrocchios been.

[Illustration: Fig. 11. + Lavabo. + Marble. Florence, San Lorenzo, old
Sacristy.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

The only surviving work of this activity, the silver relief for the
Johannis altar of the baptistery, only reminds of its material
the goldsmithing, and falls in such a late period that it is not here
may be anticipated.

What other work has been handed down from his youth shows him
Masters in other ways. Unfortunately a lot is lost here too,
including that project that, as the first, is definitely to be dated
Verrocchio's work is of particular importance for the clear insight into
his development and for his early acquired versatility
artistic knowledge would have been.

One of the decorations of the cathedral in Orvieto was a miraculous one
Image of the Madonna, painted according to the legend by St. Luke himself.
Surrounded by the dim light of the candles, almost overwhelmed by the abundance
of the Christmas gifts, it stood near the front door under an in
modestly shaped tabernacle. The legacy of far from the
Home of living bishop of Ascoli, Francesco Monaldeschi, gave in 1461
the chiefs of the cathedral construction works to Florence and Siena
Writing drawings for the construction of a chapel. Except for Desiderio there
Settignano and Giuliano da Majano also provided a certain Andrea
Michaelis a draft. This Andrea is undoubtedly identical
with Andrea del Verrocchio, son of Michele di Cione. With his
He penetrated work as little as the two older masters.
A few years later, the order fell to the cathedral builder Giovanni di
Meuccio, whose work has since perished again.

The loss of this draft is all the more to be lamented than we are too
do not have the slightest hint of a reconstruction. Once only
Verrocchio was still active in architecture, but not as a
Space artist, rather as a designer and mechanic.

Brunelleschi's cathedral dome, a work of which the master boasted
it leaves behind even the models of the ancients in grandeur
himself, had been completed in Verrocchio's year of birth. As a
She seemed to be in her bell of security and protection
tremendous tension arching over the whole city. The one at death
the master's still missing crowning with the lantern had his
Successor in respectful retention of the original design
added. On April 23, 1467, the keystone of the graceful
Renaissance forms held lantern are blessed and the construction
thus count as completed. Only the conclusion of the whole was still pending:
the button (~ bottone ~) and the ball (~ palla ~) as the carrier of the crowning
Cross. For making the smaller one to be cast in bronze
Bottone turned the building authority to Giovanni di Bartolo,
who in collaboration with the goldsmith Bartolommeo Fruosino the casting
Executed in 1467. Verrocchio was one of the experts who carried out the
Had to estimate the level of confidence in his work
technical knowledge was.

The ball resting on the button was of a much larger scale
more difficult demands on the designer. Already about the type of
The manufacturing broke out of controversy. But penetrated into one
The conference was attended in large numbers by those who would like to run in
Cast bronze, no chased copper work advocated (January 1467).
Verrocchio agreed with them. The negotiations were still hesitant
until Verrocchio himself received the commission on September 10, 1468.

It's very educational even with this mechanical edition too
watch Verrocchio experiment technically. He who at the time
who had stood up for the casting is converted when it was sent to the
Execution goes to hammering. Eight copper plates are over
spherical stones hammered, soldered with silver and
finally gilded in fire. Vasari praises the resourcefulness in the
Installation of the inner passage that led through the cavity, and
the anchoring. At the end of May 1471, the 300 bushels of grain could hold
Ball to be wound up, and on June 1st the cross was whose
Poor valuable relics preserved, let in. Except for the facade
the cathedral was now complete. A writable grocer, Luca
Landucci, whose diaries have survived, tells of the festival
that the population made. The city trumpeters blared off
the clergy and many people went up and
upstairs began a long resounding Te Deum.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze. Florence,
Courtyard of the Palazzo Vecchio.

(The list does not come from Verrocchio.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 13. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze. Florence,
Courtyard of the Palazzo Vecchio.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Among the frequent elementary hardships to which the cathedral was exposed,
has had nothing more devastating on Verrocchio's work than lightning, the
struck the lantern on the night of January 27, 1600. Up to the via
de 'Servi flew the marble rubble, and everyone screamed ~ misericordia ~.
The Grand Duke Ferdinand I left what was destroyed exactly like the old one
Restore the pattern, the cross and ball were re-gilded and two
Lead cases with documents from Pope Clement VIII and the Grand Duke
admitted, in which the violence of the storm was conjured up.




V.


In January 1496, a few months after the Medici were driven out, it was enough
the surviving brother Verrocchios, + Tommaso +, with the administrators of the
Medicinal Property a list of artistic works that
Andrea had executed on behalf of the family. Maybe stood
still payback items from the poor cloth weaver now
wanted to collect. This list, which is originally in the archive of
Uffizi Gallery, counts fifteen works that are down to a few
and shows how close Verrocchio's connection is with
of the art-loving family.

[Illustration: Fig. 14. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze.

Florence, courtyard of the Palazzo vecchio.]

When Cosimo the old man died in 1464, one appears for the first time as Verrocchio
To have made use of the artistic hand. The Signory, the one
pompous tomb with honorary statue considered, could not come to a conclusion
make, and so it stayed with the simple tombstone they
Family in front of the main altar of San Lorenzo above the underground
Had the crypt lowered into the floor. Design and execution stem from
Verrocchio her (Fig. 3). The stone consists of a square
Plate with a geometric pattern, executed in colored marble,
having. Every Christian sign or symbol is absent. The drawing
is simple: a circle is inscribed in the square frame,
which in turn includes two intersecting ellipses; the corners
fill coats of arms with the balls of the Medici. The charm of it all resides in
the colourfulness created by different types of stones and by their use
the bronze is obtained for the heraldic shields. We will still attend
other works see how much Verrocchio the colored incrustation,
especially preferred the connection of bronze with colored stone and
used them where he can with fine taste. The vertical
Arms of an ellipse contained on trapezoidal marble slabs
in bronze letters the inscription, which is the only glory of the
Deceased the publicly granted honorary name of the pater
patriae ~ contains. Of the indignant crowd is this one too
Gravestone was played badly despite its simplicity (1494),
and the family had to be rehabilitated, the horrors of the
To wipe out the devastation and restore it.

We have for this decorative work on the date of the Medicean's death
a chronological clue, it must have stylistic features
if we look at one of Verrocchio's most famous works, the
contrary to general assumption, also in this early period of the
set artistic maturity. It is the bronze statue of
young David, which is kept in the National Museum in Florence
(Fig. 4).

Vasari's narrative is particularly confused in this regard; he let
Verrocchio the statue after the legendary Roman stay
make and while the work the master still the Madonna in the
Chisel the bezel of the Bruni grave, facts that are not only incorrect
are, but are mutually exclusive. The cursory interpretation of a
The latest date of the document published by Gaye is 1476
want to establish the consummation of David; yet there are documents in that
only talking about the purchase price for which the figure is owned by the
Medici passed into the hands of the Florentine Signory. Probably have
Lorenzo and Giuliano had reason to leave the Signory
Statue to please. She rose up until the seventeenth century
the landing in front of the ~ Sala dell 'orologio ~. The place wasn't
chosen without intention. The heroic boy kept his arms drawn
Swords a door, called la catena, by which a bailiff
constantly kept watch, only to the orders of the respective
Head of administration to open or close.

David as a youthful liberator of the people was not just a hero after that
Heart of every honest republican, especially a figure
how it could not have been more convenient for an artist at the time.
But saw the early Renaissance with its enthusiasm for everything
still in the process of development, for everything supple and
Maturing in the form of a boy who is just growing up to be a youth
wants, one of her most distinguished artistic ideals.

Naked, with bowed head, foot on the giant's uneven head,
the broad tartsche in his right hand, that's how Donatello's David had stood since
Cosimo's exile in the courtyard of the government palace; a figure of strict
closed outline, full of a melancholy beauty about which
beyond the impetus and passion of that great artist
never been able to resolve. If you hold Verrocchio's figure next to it, so
there is a huge difference in design, execution and mood
surprising in the eyes.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. + The boy with the trumpet. + Thon.

Paris, collection of Mr. Gustave Dreyfuss.]

"And David was a brownish and handsome boy," says the Bible. So
he seems to have lived in Verrocchio's imagination. in the
Otherwise the master did not stick to tradition: every hint
the slingshot is missing, and the giant sword has become a humble one
Weapon that has become suitable for the boy's hand. Cheeky, sure, easy
glowed by the fire of his first triumph, the boy looks
smiling to himself; the sinewy right hand still holds the sword tight
Grip, the left is supported in the feeling of happy self-confidence
slightly on the hip. A tight leather roll surrounds the body,
Leather gaiters protect the calf and foot down to the toe. All edges of the
Garments are ornamented; a palmette adorns the breast,
Rosettes show the location of the nipples in a meticulous anatomy.
Between the feet lies the desolate head of the slain giant,
the one with his tangled hair and the coarse forms the heavily soldered one
Philistine betrays. Sitting in the gaping wound in the middle of the forehead
formerly the stone was still fixed.

[Illustration: Fig. 16. + bust of Giuliano de 'Medici. + Burned
Clay.

Paris, collection of Mr. Gustave Dreyfuss.]

The figure, although mostly clothed, is intended entirely as a nude
and felt. The muscles and the bone structure stand out
strictest through the leather of the panache. Everything is stretched, slim,
delicate, supple, especially hands and feet with the strong-boned
Limbs, the splayed and curved fingers, the protruding
second toe and the long foremost phalanx of the thumb. With strong, yes
disturbing accents are the peculiarities of nature in the stage of
Emphasis on development. The sinewy of the arms seems exaggerated
the veins that are still swollen from the tension of the forces,
exaggerated the angular protruding elbows, especially on the left
Poor. Here we see a thoroughly youthful artist in whom the
Reverence for nature still wins over the need for beauty
carries away.

In the head leaning forward a little, the one with its full curls
over the narrow, sinewy neck and over the slender, almost
lean body unfolds like a beautiful-leaved flower is that
The conflict between the artistic idea and the model is resolved (Fig.
5). Here, too, everything is delicate and fine, the bones narrow, the
Firm and definite outline, flat relief. The ones circling the face
Curls, divided into groups with the highest art, wide and lush in the
Neck resting, show the taste and the neatly detailing
Hand of the goldsmith. But the sensitive artist reveals how
nothing else in this figure a magical smile that the fine
Shapes shimmered and with the highlights and reflections of the
Metal lights up. It nests in the sharply withdrawn
Corners of the mouth, evens out the hardness and easily gets lost in it
blurred look that dreams into a happy distance.
Before Verrocchio, nobody dared to smile like that, and that
it has become a living, scurrying to and fro, not a frozen one
is, testifies to the high mastery of the young artist. This
Lionardo inherited a smile and transfigured it into that ~ dolcezza ~ who
irresistible.

[Illustration: Fig. 17. + bust of Lorenzo de 'Medici. + Burned
Clay.

Boston, United States, collection of Mr. Quincy Shaw.]

But not just the animation of expression through painting
A treatment based on the effects of light and reflections is new
and strange; also means the spatial conception of the figure
a huge step forward beyond what has already been achieved.
A clear spatial image that corresponds to the artistic idea is created
only gained if you choose the pure front view (Fig. 6). The
Motif of the raised, boldly turned left shoulder with the
the arm that is supported then speaks itself with haunting clarity
out. The fine overlaps and foreshortenings, especially on the
right side, assert yourself; the counterplay in the attitude of the
both sides of the body begins to work. One admires the safe
Feeling that the cardinal points of standing and movement are clear
highlights, e.g. B. by the formerly gilded ornaments on the neck
and at the armpit of the pan and through the webbing. The angular
The left arm jumping out of the richly moved outline finds its way through
the lowered sword in his right hand his counterweight. Always new
Subtleties that honor both talent and insight of the master
make, reveal themselves. By turning the left shoulder forward
the figure moves more freely and freely in space. she has a
rich profile view with nicely moving topline, it really is
Thought freely as a three-dimensional figure, not as a niche figure like Donatello's
David. She strives from every background and demands quite a lot
free space around you. Therefore she was in front of the pillar next to the
Catena not well positioned. Verrocchio certainly had the figure
for the interior of the courtyard in the Palazzo Medici on Via Larga or for the
Garden of one of the Medicean villas.

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Verrocchio's workshop. + Portrait bust of one
Youth +

Burnt clay. London, South Kensington Museum.]

The pedestal that is still in place
teaches important facts (Fig. 7). The square base made of
Gray-green Florentine sandstone bears a slightly tapered finish
red porphyry column. So the figure stood at a height of about
150 ~ cm ~. Furthermore, this basis again proves what
compositionally it is already a necessity, namely that the head
of the killed giant between the boy's feet, and not how
was previously believed to lie sideways under the drawn sword.
Finally we see Verrocchio's preference again from this list
for colored effects: the darkly patinated one with gold-plated ornaments
shimmering and sparkling bronze over the red stone of the pedestal.

It is not just a few who teach that we have youth work ahead of us
Defects pointed out are most clearly taught by freshness
considers the diligence in working through and the bubbly
Wealth in the details. Note z. B. Carefully if
also misunderstood, ornament on the hem that is based on Arabic letters
the panic. For grace and charm, the figure points back
Ghibertian figures, for example on the curly Esau, the figure on the back
with the two dogs, in one of the reliefs of the door of paradise. The
excellent anatomical knowledge, the precise and concise kind
the design suggest relationships with Antonio del Pollajuolo.
Pollajuolo, a few years younger than Verrocchio, enjoyed the fame,
to be the best connoisseur of the naked and become his drawings
undoubtedly had a shaping effect on Verrocchio's conception of form.

[Illustration: Fig. 19. + Female portrait bust. + Marble. Florence,
Museo Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Gebr. Alinari in Florence.)]

It does not matter, however, from which models this young force matured
is, autocratic and full of strong individuality, she steps with her
first great works. Also as a technical achievement can hardly
More perfect things can be found than this pure, seamless out of form
Flowing, lovingly chiselled bronze cast.

The motif, as happily invented as it is, is naturally so casual
appears, has found strikingly little imitation. One in the
the excessively stretched proportions and the stupid expression little
attractive clay statuette of the Berlin museum can only be used as an imitation,
should not be regarded as a study of the nude to the original Verrocchio.
Two terracotta statuettes in the South Kensington Museum, London (No.
7602 and 7402), which were apparently made in Florence around 1490,
one belonging to the Robbia workshop in the Berlin Museum (No. 125) and
similar figurines in other places show an interesting crossing
Donatellesque and Verrocchiesque motifs.

"Brown light and beautiful", as Verrocchio designed it, is the David
no later master succeeded. Michelangelo made the
Shepherd boy made the giant who, on brave watch, the enemy
in mind, a self-confession of the threatened Republican appears.
Perhaps the Verrocchio boy's smile is no less one
Self-confession of the young master who succeeded in the first throw, this
innocent, cocky smile, with which even young Roland once before Mr.
Milon's aging strength kicked in:

  For God, Father, I am not angry
  That I slew the big wretch
  Meanwhile you were sleeping.




VI.


Cosimo's son, Piero, nicknamed the Gouty Man, sank
quickly to the grave in order to be able to develop what the father initiated. He
left these duties of honor to his sons Lorenzo and Giuliano.
At first they consented to the feelings of filial piety by
Verrocchio commissioned the father in the sacristy of San Lorenzo
To erect tomb. At the same time, the bones of the already
Uncle Giovanni, who died in 1461, was a favorite son of the old man
Cosimo to be buried.

What Verrocchio has achieved is his authoritative work
decorative style has always been recognized and celebrated, already by
his contemporaries who, after completion (1472), took care of the tomb
urged, “as if they had been turned away, to a new wonder of the world
look "(Fig. 8).

Completely independent of the structure and shapes of the Florentine
Niche grave, as designed by Bernardo Rossellino and Desiderio,
Verrocchio found a new and peculiar solution. The desire
the orderer, the cause had a modest outward form
the usual pompous laying out with the portrait statue of the dead
preferable will have shown him the way. So he only has one big one
heavy grave tray placed under an arched opening, originally
the sacristy with the sacrament chapel and which he connected through a
large-meshed knitting barred.

The architectural construction with its beautiful proportions and
The maturity of the profile leaves the pure and noble profile in all its strength
Admire master builder skills. The overall impression is reminiscent
in its strength and simplicity to antiquity; so like among theirs
Arkosolien the heavy sarcophagi of the Scipions and the Roman ones
Emperor had been set up. But the master of the early Renaissance
avoids the gloomy seriousness of the old and takes through the colors and
the playing richness of the ornament of the carried basic mood that
Heavy and the oppressive.

The white marble base resting on turtles shows in the
upper plate that already known from the tombstone of old Cosimo
colored incrustation. In the sarcophagus there is red porphyry, dark green
and white marble with the restless sheen of bronze in coloristic
processed in a highly effective way. And in the reveal of the arch
the white marble strip with the rich ornament rises in between
Profiles made of gray-green Macigno up to the final rosette.

The ornament connects antique decorative forms in a tasteful peculiarity
with naturalistic plant motifs. At Donatellos more antique
Verrocchio did not train himself in decoration. Rather, he takes action
back to Ghiberti's principles and joins in, should be a role model
be made well-known in a free, masterly manner
Desiderio, whose Marzuppini grave he must have studied carefully.
But his masculine seriousness grasps and shapes nature differently than that of
a hand of Desiderios guided by a feminine-tender feeling. Against the
the soft curves of the Marzuppini grave make the Medicimonument look angular
and curly, at the same time full of character and less playful. Even if the
Differences in material there the softer, here the more energetic
Treatment required, in the end, as everywhere, the temperaments
which express themselves in instructive diversity.

[Illustration: Fig. 20. Leonardo da Vinci. + Half-length portrait of a boy
Girl. +

Vienna, collection of Prince Lichtenstein.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

The relief is well carved out, like Vettorio Ghiberti
on the framing of Andrea's Baptistery door completed in 1464
Pisano did it, but without the harshness and sharpness that is noticeable there.
Ornaments and tendrils do not overlap the whole, as with Desiderio
architectural body, so that smooth surfaces give the eye peace
and on the way of contrast the lively play of ornamentation
increase (Fig. 9). So carefully consider the individual in context
appears with the whole, so little do we get the impression of one
clever invention, a scrambling of charming details.
The invention flowed richly and calmly, contained by that wise man
Moderation, in which the artistic maturity is determined.

[Illustration: Fig. 21. Leonardo da Vinci (?). + P. Scipio. +
Marble relief.

Formerly with Mr. Rattier in Paris.]

The rendering of the flowers, the fruits, the leaves is so individual,
that one is interested in the possibility of such a thorough study of nature
doubt and want to give space to the thought that Verrocchio was here
sculpted directly above nature. Should it be in the molding of individual
Parts of the human and animal body are special
Have had skill. With symbolic reference to the
Medici enters the famous, pointed diamond, the
Family gem, on. He crowns the top of the sarcophagus; in a
Set in a ring, it is graceful through the stick of leaves in the arch
looped, it also jumps out of the closing rosette.
When the braided bronze knitting is especially on the cover of the
Sarcophagus has been criticized as a naturalistic impossibility, so
one overlooked the artistic necessity, a motif that is the whole
The background dominates, already hinting at in the main part of the composition
anticipate (Fig. 10).

The wealth of Verrocchio's imagination can be seen in this
Recognize the decor of the two vases in the marble arched reveal
which festoons unfolded beautifully with alternating repetition of one
palm-like container and a tuft of laurel with curly leaves
climb up. The vase on the right is decorated with a turkey dance, at
especially the movement of what is seen from the back around the corner
flying angel boy is true and graceful. The vase on the left is
richer with ornament, her figurative ornament is limited
on angel heads with garlands hanging between them. Because both
Vases are placed over a corner, they deepen the rather shallow valley
of the arch and help reinforce the illusion of space.

As with the tombstone of old Cosimo, everyone is missing from this monument
Reference to the Christian worldview: certainly a meaningful one
Marks for the time.

With the exception of the one later inserted into the arch opening
Board shed, the large-meshed knitted network, the one
A view of the adjoining sacrament chapel should allow everyone
Brings an effect and prevents the back view of the sarcophagus is
the work remained free from any distortion.

Little did the donors suspect that they were also having their own tomb
buildings. Both Giuliano and Lorenzo have next to their father and uncle
found their resting place in the same spacious porphyry chest until 1559,
when Grand Duke Cosimo I moved their corpses into the new sacristy
where their coffins were recently placed under the Madonna of the
Michelangelo found it.

As completely new as this solution of the niche grave must be explained, so
she did not attend much school. Just once more, at the tomb of Neri
di Gino Capponi in fabric. Spirito, the motif of the barred occurs
Arch niche on. Certainly based on Verrocchios
Idol; because if the one buried there died in 1457 and
the sarcophagus, in the forms of the Donatello school, older than
Verrocchio's monument, the latticework can only be built after the
Transfer of the tomb from the old church to the new building
not before 1481, the year when in the new church
the first mass was read. -

[Illustration: Fig. 22. + Saint Jerome. + Statuette. Burned
Clay.

London, South Kensington Museum.]

[Illustration: Fig. 23. + Mary with the child. + Burnt clay.
Florence, Uffizi Gallery.

(Formerly in S. Maria Nuova.)

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Looking back, it is not easy to find the path from the Medicigrabe
artistically just a few steps away, but hidden in one
Washbasin set up in the side room leads (Fig. 11). The one about the work
The literary testimonies received tend to confuse the question of the
Author than to clarify it. The oldest source writes the lavabo
Rossellino to, Vasari describes it as a joint work of
Donatello and Verrocchio. For the time of creation we get through
the noble falcon with the diamond rings and
the banner, the personal impresa of Pieros des gout-frail,
an exact clue; it must be during his lifetime and on his behalf
be executed, i.e. no later than 1469.

[Illustration: Fig. 24. + Maria with the child. + Marble. Florence,
Museo Nazionale.]

The boldness of the structure, which already touches on the baroque
eminently painterly throw of the composition, the interesting change
proudly curved curves, the strongest reliefs and the most delicate
Surface decoration speak of a builder and decorator first
Rank, which in instantaneous, strong effect the creator of the
Medicigrabes even seems superior. But not only in the individual
Shapes, the lion's head, the winged female dragons, the
Carrying the pelvis, the tooth cut exactly on the lid of the porphyry drawer
is so educated, the same artist reveals himself here as there,
We also recognize an essential element in the polychromy of the washbasin
Verrocchio's decorative principle again. But the execution is in
both works different. In the washbasin, which is also partially
is damaged, has a more fleeting hand, but with a masterful one
sure understanding of the shapes, the chisel guided. Not that everywhere
same because it makes a divergence between the pedantic
Execution of the wall filling and the lively, even stormy swing
of the free-standing parts apply. And maybe the argument is the
Sources best with what the artwork says about itself
to settle that Rossellino and Verrocchio in the effective
Wells have been involved together, with one the wall, the
the basin and the vase fell to others.

Be that as it may, the washbasin counts among the spiritual and
most imaginative decorative pieces representing the Florentine Quattrocento
has to show at all. All later achievements appear poor
and sober against the wealth and verve that these forms lead to
has attached a whole.

[Illustration: from b. 25. Kind of Verrocchio. + Mary with the child. +
Glazed clay.

Florence, Sacristy by S. Croce.]

Two other decorative works by Verrocchio can no longer be seen
prove. The bronze candelabra for which Andrea paid in 1469
and which the Signory had ordered for her audience hall,
has been searched for in vain among those still preserved in the Bargello.
Presumably it was a replica of an antique bronze chandelier.

[Illustration: Fig. 26. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the
Children. + Colored stucco.

Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

[Illustration: Fig. 27. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the
Children. + Burnt clay.

London, South Kensington Museum.]

In October 1474 Verrocchio poured a famous one, with figures and
Ornaments decorated big bell for the monks in Vallombrosan
Monte Scalari. After the abolition of the monastery (1775) the bell came
in the possession of the parish priest of San Pancrazio in Val d'Arno, burst in 1815
in two and was poured over by an unsuspecting hand.




VII.


The heavy ashlar of the Palazzo vecchio opens up on you
Columned courtyard, in the middle of which a fountain with a quiet
Fall lets its waters play. After the glaring sunshine and that
noisy hustle and bustle in the liveliest square in town
There is twilight and silence here. The air blows like a grotto
the darkness of the vaulted hallway, and that falls over the high walls
Dimmed light like in a shaft. Hit its brightest rays
the winged boy with the wriggling fish in his arms, who
like a fleeting bird resting gracefully for a moment over the
Water art seems to linger (Fig. 12).

The older art judges vote in praise of this work by Verrocchio
with the newer and newest without reservation. “Nothing can
Be more cheerful and lively, says Rumohr in his Italian
Research “, as the expression of the faces and the movement of this
Child; and nowhere among the modern ore casts one meets one
such a beautiful treatment of the fabric, such an exemplary style. Bey
deceptive appearance of half-flying, half-running movement, rests
nevertheless the group, which has been invited many times, is clearly in theirs
Focal points; after a happy feeling, the artist gave the child
plump fullness, the fish and the wings (the mostly unloaded
Parts) a certain angular sharpness. "

With this putto Verrocchio has one way beyond the limits
Quattrocentist form development that has flourished
created to tie in with the baroque, even the rococo
not missed.

In Donatello the real creator of the genre is celebrated,
those child figures who have a strange middle between the erots
of antiquity and the angels of the Christian worldview.
Donatello uses them with noticeable preference and makes use of them
their like decorative elements. But he cares about their education
only the organic connection between the parts of the body, not the structure
the single form. There is something summary in his approach to the
Towards nature. Suitable for comparison with Verrocchio's fountain putto
Donatello's Cupid in the Bargello, smiling over the trampled on
Snakes prances. He appears to be less buxom in his body structure
but almost clumsy next to the fish man. Even with the bow and
the arrow placed on it, which compels the position of the hands to complete,
it is more bound in outline and moved far less freely in space. in the
Head completely reveals Donatello's antique style, from which
Verrocchio's antiqueization (see p. 49 below) differs significantly.

Luca della Robbia also has the child figure with a strong character
Based on ancient models for one of his favorite depictions
made, but offers itself among them, since they have all remained reliefs
are not worthwhile comparisons.

In contrast, the Christ Child points to Desiderios tabernacle in S. Lorenzo
already on Verrocchio. This blessing boy is already showing the plump
Forms the fat pads on the joints that are deeply incised
Skin folds. But with Desiderio the astonishing prevails
Shape security the individual inspiration. The grace works a little
indifferent, and an almost soulless refinement speaks from the ans
Academic grazing smoothness and coolness.

Verrocchio, however, gives a far with the same mastery of form
more original naturalness. Like no one before him, he has LB
Let Alberti's warning be concerned: “The artist also note that
our limbs in childhood round, turned, and cozy
for the touch. ”Verrocchio's putto is quite a boy, while
Desiderio represents the child in a more sexless sense. Verrocchio
has different proportions, a strong, stocky build
stronger relief. Its forms appear to be more solid, more individual
Smile fresher, his eyes more mischievous.

[Illustration: Fig. 28. Francesco di Simone. + Mary with the child. +

Marble. Florence, Museo Nazionale.]

And yet with this figure the joy in the details is definitely evident
before the delight of the whole thing. Here the motive is everything. With
the lines extending freely and boldly into space on all sides
the spatial illusion already observed with David is increased.
Impossible to look at this putto other than at the center of one
architectural system, accessible from all sides
to think. And what contrast between the views of the fore
and the back (Fig. 13 and 14). How is the one between the rough
gripping children's fists, writhing fish skillfully in motion
arranged in the figure by its broad, goggle-eyed skull, above
covering the left wing, alternation in the symmetry of the
Bringing lines, its curved tail bridges the gap between the right
splayed lines of the other wing and leg fills. In the
From the front the boy appears almost naked, from the rear
with the shirt fluttering in rich bulging folds an enlivenment of the
Striving for surfaces and shapes.

[Illustration: Fig. 29. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the child
and an angel. + marble. Boston (United States), collection of Mr.
Quincy Shaw.]

The counterplay of the, felt down to the painterly subtleties
different substances would have a stronger effect without the fatal one
Cleansing the figure at the beginning of the nineteenth century
had to put up with. Now the new patina has set unevenly,
and where they appear in a mussel formation that is not seldom observed
not only the clarity of the form, but also the
Uniformity of the overall impression sensitively damaged.

In his handwritten memorandum, Tommaso Verrocchio mentions
the bronze putto was intended for the villa in Careggi. He
will have stood there in the yard or in the garden, and we have good ones
Reason, the three bronze heads and four listed immediately behind
Snapdragons made of marble with the fountain as ornament and gargoyles
to bring in connection. That would then result in a polychrome
Effect as Verrocchio loved her. However, no more precise information can be given
determine, because the figure came at the instigation of Grand Duke Cosimo
between 1550 and 1568 to Florence in the courtyard of the Palazzo vecchio,
where she ousted Donatello's David. The beautifully rounded porphyry bowl
with the marble baluster and the three-tier pedestal stirs out
the sixteenth century by the sculptor Tadda. Possible,
that in the head of the baluster three of those four are marble
Reused lion heads; at least they show Verrocchieske
Forms and are clearly embedded. Has a fine sense of style
Tadda in the composition of the architectural parts the character
the early Renaissance. The water is also with it
Restraint used as was customary in the Quattrocento. With
large rushing masses that stimulate the ear and the shape is silvery
disguise, the early Renaissance does not work. On the petite and
Her striving is pleasing, and to this corresponds the thin,
iridescent jet of water, its rippling fall just loud enough
is to make the dreamy silence perceptible all around. And this
The memory leads silence back to the cypress garden of the villa
to Careggi, where Lorenzo enjoys being with his philosophical friends
Talk lingered, and where the fountain with the fish man over all
learned disputations away into the scent of roses and the cool evening
chatted ...

[Illustration: Fig. 30. Mino da Fiesole. + Tomb of Cardinal Niccolo
Forteguerri. + Marble. Rome, San Clemente.]

Another putto is thought of in the older sources. He stopped
a hammer in the movable arms and struck the hours with it
on the clock on the Mercato nuovo. Such mechanical feats
enjoyed great popularity. Dello Delli had a similar one
Figure worked for the tower of the town house in Siena. The biggest
But Lorenzo della Volpaia enjoyed fame in this technique, from it
Workshop of the famous clock in the Sala del Oriuolo named after her
came from the Florentine town hall. Has received up to our days
just one example of this kind: the hammer-hammering men
the clock tower in Venice. You give in, at least to the mechanics, one
Presentation of the "beautiful and imaginative work" Verrocchio.

[Illustration: Fig. 31. + Sketch for the tomb of Cardinal Niccolo
Forteguerri. +

Burnt clay. London, South Kensington Museum.]

The unfortunately modern painted clay statuette of a naked,
wingless boy, owned by Mr. G. Dreyfuss in Paris
the motif of the fountain putto again in a slight variation
(Fig. 15). Standing on a hemisphere, in rapid motion, seems
the little one having held a trumpet in the raised right hand, in
which he blows with full cheeks. A look at similar tubebasers
Donatello's putti in Siena or Padua not only shows the distance
of the two masters from each other, but corroborates again on one
particularly illuminating example of the impossibility of Verrocchio in a
Bringing a school relationship with Donatello.

[Illustration: Fig. 32. + Tomb of Cardinal Niccolo Forteguerri. +
Pistoia, San Jacopo Cathedral.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Each of the ~ alcuni putti bellissimi ~ mentioned by Vasari is
Track has been lost. Perhaps replicas of it are in the
large-headed, half with legs slightly crossed
erect lying naked children, two of whom received the
Berlin Museum owns. Verrocchio's hand himself will not become anyone
recognize in them that they are important to the school. Self
Albrecht Dürer did not disdain this Verrocchiesken putto without it
Circumstances for the Christ Child on the Madonna with the Pear (Vienna) too
use. And the plump, chubby angels of
Baroque and still rococo descendants of those putti
Verrocchios that in the heat of the art market the centuries and the
Nationalities sometimes get confused.

[Illustration: Fig. 33. Lorenzetti. + Portrait statue of the cardinal
Niccolo Forteguerri. +

Marble. Pistoia, Liceo Forteguerri.]




VIII.


The pair of brothers in whose service Verrocchio the versatility of his
Talent has to be tried out most often, is divided into two excellent ones
Clay busts passed to posterity from the hand of the master. These
Busts, unfortunately in two private collections of public attention
removed mean all the more that they mean men in theirs
the most powerful and happiest years of life.

The temperaments contrasted as strongly as the characters. In
Lorenzo, the older brother (born 1449), lived the somewhat melancholy life
and the father's not quite healthy blood, in Giuliano (b.
1453) the strength and joy of life of the grandfather. Both
as lucky heirs found a rich family estate, over
which they disposed of with the generosity that they dispose of in abundance
Born probably pending. The thirst for fame of the century blazed in
both equally high and bright. The power and prestige of the house too
increase was her only thought. But with Lorenzo, the melancholy one
Temperaments from a young age to smaller and larger
Leiden was ailing, the ambition was directed more towards the training of the
Mind and spirit, Giuliano, the sanguine, vied with
equals in the practice and mastery of all physical
Powers and abilities, in the refinement of the external appearance. The
Ideal of the fully developed Renaissance, the perfect Hofmann, the
Cortegiano, answers, but in these two personalities
split, already on.

[Illustration: Fig. 34. Lorenzo di Credi. + Flying Angel. + Study
to the Forteguerri tomb.

Silver pen drawing. London. British Museum.]

No wonder that Lorenzo has the finest and richest minds as well
to rally as Giuliano knew how to flourish in the noble world.
The festivities with which they were not sparse, the tournaments, the
they rode in honor of their ladies of the heart, were like poets by
Luca Pulci and Angelo Poliziano sung about. The Platonic Academy,
with Marsilio Ficino at the helm, liked to gather in one
of the villas of Lorenzo. Lorenzo himself was devoted to poetry,
and one of his melancholy, ingratiating verses, in which he is the
fleeting beauty of youth in the uncertainty of the morning
to enjoy the hour, is always quoted when the language
comes to the end of the early Renaissance. Lorenzo was one of those who made him
understood, adored, feared by those he ignored, so
Giuliano was everyone's favorite. Without a doubt he is then
been the most popular man in Florence. Hence the outrage flared
also all the brighter than in the murder attempt by Pazzi Giuliano, the
Flower of knighthood, his life under the daggers of the conspirators
had to leave. Like Caesar, he was barely twenty-five years old and laid out
in San Lorenzo with the twenty-one death wounds visible to all. The
entire youth in the city put on mourning clothes.

[Illustration: Fig. 35. Verrocchio's workshop. + Sitting angels with
the name of Christ. +

Marble. Berlin. Royal Museums.]

Not too long before that catastrophe, Giuliano becomes our master
sat by the bust, one of the ornaments of the Dreyfuss family
Collection at Paris forms (Fig. 16). With perfect certainty it is
Character hit, from the bold posture and turn of the head
to the left speaks enterprise and daring. Throw your eyes
a challenging look to the side and the full, strong lips
purses a streak of superiority and contempt for the everyday world. On
ironic smile sits in the dimples of the cheeks. Strength, pride and
Self-confidence lay on the broad face, the curls heavy
wreath. A marvel of armouring is the tank,
that covers the broad chest. The collar encloses a brazen one
Neck, the head of Medusa threatens from the chest. Here has again
the goldsmith had a fine hand in the game while in
the system of the whole and in the head the accurate characteristic
disclosed.

In Lorenzo's bust (with Mr. Shaw in Boston, fig. 17) the predominates
Expression of great willpower, the melancholy mood. The
Individual forms, forehead, nose and mouth are naturally more noble here
than with Giuliano. The soft cables in the system tighten and tighten
an energy that struggles to fight off physical suffering. In
the treatment is all big and simple. Under the neck
smoothly falling hair stands out for the beautifully rounded shape of the
Skull. A strange mixture of active and passive mental life
gives the portrait its high psychological appeal:

    The wild strength of young eyes
  Defiance of the mouth and harsh silence,
  A train of dream and passion ...

The less ornate armor is adorned by two on the chest
facing each other holding coat of arms dragons, which in similar formation
have already been observed at the washbasin, and two on the shoulder joints
Gorgon heads with the same furious scream as the Medusa
ejects from the tank of Giuliano.

Of all the busts of Lorenzo, this one is the most likable.
Later life experience and mental work made the moves hard, and
Illness drew deep furrows and furrows.

Verrocchio's creative power only becomes apparent when these are compared
related and yet so different personalities clearly and with
Admiration recognized. Also with regard to the complete similarity
let us trust Master without hesitation. If we a little
older-looking heads of the brothers on Bertoldo's medal, the
Lorenzo was struck in memory of the catastrophe of 1478 for
using the chronological fixation of our busts as an aid
we Verrocchio's work in the early seventies, back in time
of the Medicimonument.

Verrocchio will probably have removed the mask from the dead Giuliano,
since he was unequaled in this art. Shaping above nature
in which the master used a specially invented casting compound,
he used it especially in connection with the wax modeler Orsini.
Together they created life-size statues in which face and
Hands reshaped in wax over nature, the skeleton of wood
hid in clothes made of natural fabrics, the hair by one
Wig were replaced. So took in the need for truth in life
the early Renaissance the same slightly sloping path to the trivial,
which our panopticon art took out of the need for sensation,
with the serious difference, however, that at that time artists
were at work. More serious purposes were also pursued. Lorenzos
Friends and relatives left his costumed wax portrait
as a gift of dedication and thanksgiving for the happy salvation from
Set up a pazzi conspiracy. One of those wax figures came into the
Church of Blessed Chiarito, wearing the costume that Lorenzo had on the
Had laid paths to that fateful high mass; a second, with
dressed in the bourgeois Lucco, there was a third in the Annunziata
in S. Maria degli Angeli below Assisi.

[Illustration: Fig. 36. Francesco di Simone. + Tabernacle. + Marble.
Perugia. Chiesa di Monteluce.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Among the terracotta busts that are already wearing the costume after the end of the
Belonging to the early renaissance, one has recently in a previously
A young man's bust attributed to Antonio del Pollajuolo shows the portrait of
Lorenzo's son, Piero il fiero (born 1471) and want to recognize it
Verrocchio assigned. Albeit the identification of personality
it is valid, the provision on Verrocchio raises concerns. Of the
Head that considers itself more by freshness than by individual
The development of the details shows the style, but
not the characteristics of Verrocchio's own hand.

[Illustration: Fig. 37. + Entombment of Christ. + Thon. Berlin. Royal
Museums.]

[Illustration: Fig. 38. + The death of Francesca Tornabuoni. + Left
Half. Marble.

Florence. Museo nazionale.]

With other multiple busts of young men (in Berlin and
London) already leads the rough work on the thought of the
Workshop. In type closely related to one another with the
Parted hair in curls, his broad face
with the somewhat rigid eyes and the friendly, open expression,
all cut off below the shoulders and in baked clay
carried out, they were, as portraits of young relatives, the custom
according to the time, on the chimneys, over the doors and windows as
Room decorations (Fig. 18).

[Illustration: Fig. 39. + The death of Francesca Tornabuoni. + Rights
Half. Marble.

Florence. Museo nazionale.]

A similar series of busts made in the same material
older bearded men, all of whom were Verrocchio's type of Christ
is based on - in the collections of the Musée Cluny in Paris, formerly
at the painter Landsinger in Munich, in the South Kensington Museum in London,
in the courtyard of the Collegiata in San Gemignano - are considered studies
to those large silver statues of the apostles that Sixtus IV. supposedly
ordered from Verrocchio. So apocryphal, as I said, this one
Order appears together with the Roman stays derived from it,
so loose is the connection between this work and the workshop
of the artist. Among the students, Agnolo di Polo is considered special
skillfully praised in the execution of such clay work; meanwhile
offers the only work certified by him, a bust of Christ in the
Liceo Forteguerri to Pistoja, not enough clues to
one or the other of the busts mentioned is sure to come towards him
determine.

The depiction of feminine charms must be more in the Madonnas
Verrocchios are more sought after than among the few female busts that
has awarded him the recent criticism. If, however, the most beautiful
of all female portrait busts of the Quattrocento with Verrocchio in
Is connected, it only proves how high the
Artist is appreciated. This bust (Fig. 19) which is the National Museum
Preserved at Florence, comes from the Palazzo Medici, which is why in the
A member of that family has also been suspected
is. But so far all attempts to identify the person
failed. It is very peculiar and contrary to custom
the end of the bust with the very visible, loosely above the breast
folded arms. The head with the ringlets over the temples
and ears and the pigtails tucked into a silk cap whole
tilted gently to the right and back, the woman with the narrow,
long-fingered hands wrapped in the wide belt
Primrose bouquet in front of the breast. And from these wonderfully shaped hands
with the slim, pointed fingers speaks more soul and spirit,
than from the still embarrassed smile, that in the corners of the beautiful
Mouth sits. Who was able to form such hands? Certainly with your hands
David, with their graceful spread, are of the highest delicacy,
and if the stronger bone structure there the soft beauty here
has given way, this can to a certain extent quite well
with the diversity of personalities and material
be explained. But there lives a soulful one in these woman's hands
A grace that Verrocchio does not have in the most beautiful of his Madonnas
was able to express. Who Leonardo's hand studies, especially
that splendid drawing in Windsor Castle with one hand
our bust has a very similar position in front of its eyes, is also before
this bust, initially hesitant, rather to the student than
think of the master. Meanwhile the features in favor of Leonardo
soon multiply. The portrait of a girl in the Liechtenstein gallery too
Vienna offers very surprising analogies (Fig. 20). Not just in the
Outward appearances of the costume and the hairstyle, also in the conception of form
the same artist reveals himself in both: here as there the broad,
Flat layout of the face, the eyes set wide apart
with the heavily drooping lids that look tired
Giving veiled, the pure and sharply drawn mouth. And if
the latest Leonardo research is right by holding the hands of the
Windsor drawing as a study for the demonstrably cut off
of the Vienna portrait, the similarity extends
the bust with the portrait also on the hands. Quite Leonardesque
the bulging of the wrists, the flat folds with the
narrow ridges, which are essentially from Verrocchio's bulging folds
deviate is the uncommon and never lost in the petty
Care of details. If a girl's head looks out of the Vienna picture,
whose beauty, as the inscription on the back says, still through
Virtue is enhanced, so the marble bust smiles
Grace of the mature woman, especially in profile view
beautifully pronounces. So do we have, as was supposed, the same
Personality and, I add, by + the same artist + in front of us,
so certainly from different years of life.

In a second, far less individual marble bust (with Mr.
G. Dreyfuss in Paris) because of the coat of arms on the sleeve of the
Damask robe want to recognize a Colleoni and accordingly
the work of Verrocchio's last years in Venice
assigned. The emblem alone is only roughly correct
not to say not at all with the easily recognizable condottiere
the costume and hairstyle show the Florentine fashion around 1470,
and in the profile view the bust moves very close to those
which is not quite convincingly attributed to Desiderio da Settignano
become. A concise criticism is impossible here, since the bust is on the neck
broken and put together, also from too sharp cleaning
has suffered considerably. At the back of the head, on which the very artificial
Hairstyle with braided ribbons and flowers can be used
former care of the chisel can still be recognized. In her current one
State, the work may not make a higher claim than under the
Collective term to be cataloged Verrocchio.

There is also no female clay bust at Mr. Foulc's in Paris
perfectly received. It eludes my judgment in so far as
it only became known to me in one illustration. With individual
Enlivenment of the head, in which the very lively mouth is noticeable, seems
she gives me a good example of Verrocchio's conception of femininity
To deliver portraits that are conspicuously related to those of Desiderios
shows. The robe is unfortunately quite sober. -

[Illustration: Justice.]

[Illustration: Love.]

[Illustration: Faith.]

[Illustration: Hope.

Fig. 40-43. + Marble statuettes, belonging to the Tornabuoni grave. + Paris.
~ Mme. ~ Ed. André.]

Vasari still speaks of two bronze relief portraits, ideal portraits
Alexander d. Size and King Darius, Lorenzo, if not
as a gift giver, but as a middleman to the art-loving king
Matthias Corvinus sent to Hungary. The loss of this work
brings us important evidence of Verrocchio's relationship to
Antiquity. Surely the master grabbed the coins and for the guys
the cut stones with the images of those two rulers
back, who were in the Medicean palace, since the zeal for collecting
Cosimos and his son Piero dedicated themselves to this area of ​​ancient cabaret
had turned. Verrocchio, however, is completely free of his imagination
in the ornamentation of armor, the diversity of which is particularly famous
will be followed. Giuliano's breastplate was already on
Samples of fine taste and the cleanest armouring. For the
Loss of these works must at this point be a reference to the magnificent
Marble relief with the inscription ~ P · SCIPIONI · ~ help out since
Death of its last owner, Mr. Rattier, has nowhere in Paris
can be proven (Fig. 21). In the elegantly developed forms
with the restrained smile, the playful richness of the ornaments
(note the meandering lines of the ribbons), in the purity of the
The contour with a sharp profile can also be seen here on drawings
Leonardos reminded me, especially of the great warrior head of the
Malcolm Collection. Indeed, the boundary between teacher and
Student again so indeterminate that, regardless of the
lively support for Leonardo, not trusting the decisive
To step from one to the other, even less so than mine
Efforts to get to see the original were unsuccessful
are.

[Illustration: Fig. 44. Francesco di Simone. + Tomb of
Legal scholar Francesco Tartagni. + Marble. Bologna. San Domenico.]

Verrocchio also has the Medici as a restorer of ancient works of art
served. Among the many antique torsos that Cosimo the old made from
Rome had brought with them was a Marsyas, who of his time
Donatello added and at the door of the Medicipalast, which on Via
Ginori goes out, had been set up. Soon after was in Lorenzos
Hands fell a Marsya torso of red marble, the Verrocchio
had to supplement, and which make a counterpart to that first
should. The 1495 dissolution of the Medicean art treasures is
has also become fatal for these antiquities. True, they came after
Restoration of the family in 1513 apparently to their old ones
Place back where the traveling legal scholar Johann Fichard came from
Frankfurt a. M. saw in 1536, but then both tracks are lost
completely. The statues of Marsyas No. 155 and 156 in
first corridor of the Uffizi with those of Donatello and Verrocchio
supplemented identified. According to Fichard's description, that of
Verrocchio in all essential parts, with the exception of the head
completed torso shown sitting. Probably him
to this addition the same cameo from the possession of the Medici
necessary clues that Michelangelo gave in the interesting
Relief copied from his youth. Verrocchio processed with it
almost playful skill a piece of red marble, whose
white veins that faithfully mimicked tendons and nerves; and this
Certainly equally difficult and tasteless feats satisfied
the naturalistic sense of time to the highest. One was allowed in
fifteenth century still expect a little nerve!

[Illustration: Fig. 45. + The beheading of John the Baptist. +
Driven silver.

Florence. Museo dell 'Opera.]

This restoration offers the decent opportunity to develop the relationship
Verrocchios to set antiquity. He is completely on the ground in it
of most and the most outstanding of his contemporaries. With you
he shared the feeling of the artistic achievements of the present
could be seen with honors alongside those of the old world.
As a Florentine, he does not know enthusiasm without criticism. The Council
of LB Alberti is always present to him: the connection to the
Form formation in antiquity was said to be closed through independent study of nature
replace. He probably copied occasionally z. B. that candelabra for that
Audience room of the signers, of which it is expressly assured, he
was "modeled on a certain antique vessel". Also owned
Vasari in his Verrocchio collection a terracotta relief, one
Representing a horse's head after antiquity. A beautiful terracotta statuette
of seated Saint Jerome in the South Kensington Museum
London, where the master puts the robe on his lap
carefully studied, repeated the motif of the well-known ancient
Dornausziehers, which then circulated in many free copies
was (Fig. 22). Ancient mythical creatures: the female dragons who
Medusa heads, ancient decorative forms: the lion's foot, the turtles,
the cornucopia, the candelabra, antique ornament: the fruit wreath, that
The acanthus leaf, the palmette frieze and the rosette are used by Verrocchio
with preference, but they are always freely reproduced, spiritually animated,
peculiarly transformed. From all this speaks the artistic elation
of time, which is reflected in the reproduction of "nature" that is, innumerable,
lovingly observed and painstakingly reproduced details
Old already felt superior. Ugolino Verino's praise, the Verrocchio
to Phidias, at other times equated to Lysippus, would have
Our Master's self-esteem certainly not embarrassed.
And not just in front of the terrifying truth of life of the bloodthirsty
He likes the tortured with the justified pride of the self-confident
Artist asked: Who of the ancients ...?

[Illustration: Fig. 46. + Christ and the unbelieving Thomas. +

Bronze. Florence. Or San Michele. Donatello's marble tabernacle.]

Verrocchio prevented this developed artistic self-esteem
however by no means his artistry even on tasks of only
to put decorative meaning. The self-confident artist was still closing
not the dutiful guildsman. So he made twenty masks
after life as jewelry over the doors of the palace in Via
larga. Here, too, his already vaunted art is above nature
to have come to form. Presumably we have among these
Masks to think of portraits of the deceased, loved ones close to the family;
we learn from the Medici inventory that such portraits
were installed several times over the doors. Verrocchio also improved them
over the loggias of the courtyard and the arcades of the garden
antique heads.

After all, Verrocchio is also one of the great festival decorators.
For the two tournaments sung about by Pulci and Polizian, his
Messrs Lorenzo and Giuliano in honor of Lucrezia de 'Donati and the
Simonetta Vespucci rode in 1469 and 1475, Verrocchio designed the whole
magnificent elevator. When entering the barriers in the piazza
S. Croce were erected, pages wore the purple and white painted ones
Standard ahead. On this “Spiritello” was Lucrezia de 'Donati
painted in azure brocade dress embroidered with gold and silver; under
the sun shone out in a rainbow and cast a bright one
Shine on the figure holding a branch of laurel from a dry trunk
plucks and winds it into a wreath. In was emblazoned on the rainbow
Gold letters Lorenzo's motto: ~ le tems revient ~.

[Illustration: Fig. 47. + Christ and the unbelieving Thomas. + Bronze.
Florence. Or San Michele.]

Verrocchio's were even more glamorous and far more comprehensive
guided preparations for the reception of Duke Galeazzo Sforza,
who in March 1471 with his wife Bona of Savoy and one
Entourage of two thousand people made its entry into Florence.
The princely rulers stayed in the Medici palace. All
The family's riches were emblazoned in the rooms: above precious things
Flemish carpets hung on the furniture; ancient sculptures and modern
Paintings for which the art-loving Duke has a special understanding
showed, graced corners and walls. Venetian candlesticks sprayed
Candlelight, and in the great ballroom, where the tables are glorious
stood prepared, the silver crockery sparkled on the precious
Sideboard. Garlands entwined themselves on the wall and ceiling, bowls
face and smell delighted with oriental incense.
If in the often-cited memorandum of Tommaso also from
a "~ aparato ~" is spoken of, then the thought is of a
Festival performance is probably permitted, as is the case with Signory in three
Churches of the city organized in honor of the foreign guests.




IX.


The considerable group of depictions of the Madonna in marble and clay
and stucco, on which Verrocchio's name is attached, can be
can be traced back to an original work by the master. Until just before his
When it was transferred to the Uffizi, it was hidden in one
Hall leading to the gallery of the S. Maria Nuova hospital. In
strong high relief, which in certain parts pushes to the limit of the
It shows the Madonna up to her hips,
lovingly smiling down at the naked Christ child who was with
gesture of blessing on a splendid pillow in front of her on one
The parapet is in place (Fig. 23). The group is made of baked clay,
so that, as always before terracottas, the thought of a model for the
Bronze cast or marble finish comes to life. Can't do enough
be complained that we have no news of the origin of the work
have; the one mentioned by Vasari, from the Casa Medici
We must not recognize Madonna in ours because neither that
Material - there it was a marble relief - nor the description -
"The Christ Child on the mother's neck" - fits. The in all parts
equally accomplished and beautiful work provides sufficient information
Verrocchio's ideal of the Madonna.

The Quattrocento still had the hieratic tradition
related representation of the enthroned Madonna broken in favor
a more worldly, more humanly intimate view. The untouchable
appeared to the artists, stripped of their heavenly dignity, in all
Maternity and nurseries in the image of the woman who has recently given birth and the mother herself
to be present. And what about maternal care and maternal happiness
came before their eyes, formed their skillful hands in naive
Indifference to the lofty thought they should serve. Not in
the artists differed from what they saw, but in
as they saw it.

Donatello takes hold, passionate and stormy, as he feels
the tragic side of the subject. His Madonnas are the ancient ones
Related to heroines, seers, and sibyls; like that they have
looked deeply into the deceit of hearts and the suffering of the world; of the
Niobe's pain lives in hers, albeit dampened by resignation
large, almost rigid eyes. As if they knew how soon they would give it up
must, they clutch the child with dull passion,
wrap it in the wide folds of their veil and fear
it is more through her wild tenderness than that she is trusting it
did. Luca della Robbia emphasizes the Virgin in his Madonnas,
who plays with the child like a younger sibling. Your
A faint shadow of the impending future hardly clouds pure looks.
Everything graceful, dandy, girlish is to these young mothers
own. Their robes are plain and unadorned, while the
Show Donatello's rich pleating and modest decorations. The
Child, never as ugly as the more naturally educated des
Donatello, hugs his mother, in whose arms his laughing
and a shining children's paradise. At Donatello the
oppressive mood before the onset of the tragedy, with Luca the cheerful one
Jurisdiction of the idyll.

Verrocchio's Madonna, on the other hand, is a noble woman in happiness
young motherhood. Above the slightly wavy, with ribbons
With her braided hair she wears a neatly folded veil;
the cloak over the beautifully lined undergarment is supported by a large,
bead-set agraffe held together. With downcast eyes
and with a fine, reserved smile she looks at her beautiful
Child. This is a boy with a lovely curly head, chubby cheeks
and happy children's eyes. Not quite sure on his tight yet
Little legs, he grabs the shawl with his left hand as if to hold onto it
the mother, the right hand, easily supported by the mother, does the
Gesture of blessing. In this Madonna is the deep human
Sensation paired with the noblest decency. The upright proud
The mother's posture expresses the consciousness of representation;
at the same time the mother takes a step back from the child. In the child
again, much innate class consciousness is alive; his smile
is already touching the gracious. And yet the human freezes
nowhere in courtly etiquette. But the bourgeois sphere is in
this Madonna already overcome. In her nursery it is certainly like that
A distinguished visitor, like Ghirlandajo in the choir of S. Maria
Introducing Novella to Saint Anne.

[Illustration: Fig. 48. Agnolo di Polo. + Bust of Christ. + Painted clay.
Pistoia. Liceo Forteguerri.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio's formal development can be studied excellently in this work
become. Compared to the works considered so far, there is a stronger one
Relief and an increase in motifs can be seen that have not been seen before
could prove. For the later style of the master is named
the very rich folds of Mary's mantle are remarkable. The
Motifs are already piling up and might be unsettling, they say
not in the naked child's body with its large, calm surfaces
the other side an effective compensation. This Christ Child is in
all parts of the brother of the fish man, only here in the soft one
Thon the spongy and puffy of the child's body even better
It is expressed when it was mistreated there in the later patination
Bronze. We could already see the charming, graceful smile of the Madonna
perceive in David, here it is elevated to the feminine, lovely
and at the same time softened up. The hands, fleshy but nobly shaped,
provide the strongest evidence that the female marble bust
of the Bargello does not belong to Verrocchio, even with your hands
there with the finely pointed fingers as a beauty of its own
Wanted to see the model. He speaks of Verrocchio's painterly feeling
also the fact that he included the plinth of the relief in the composition
and thinks of it as a balustrade on which the pillow
rests and over the cloak of Mary with a couple of beautiful ones
Pleated motifs falls. So it was only the late Renaissance that merged again
ideal space with the real delimitation. The closed in the pointed arch,
blue painted rear wall with the dove spraying rays as a symbol of
Holy Spirit and the base with the badly painted inscription
(which have been left out in the figure) are later, disfiguring
Add.

It is now very educational to see how the workshop and
the school of the master comes to terms with this type of madonna: she
generalizes the form and softens the expression. The alleged
Madonna des Bargello (Fig. 24) from the Casa Medici
neither be the work that Vasari is about in the Grand Duchess's cabinet
saw one door, one would still like to do the handwritten execution of the
Recognize master. The Madonna is smooth and sweet in expression,
the Christ Child stiff in posture and without the warm smile.
Technically, the flat treated relief coincides with the
bruised wrinkles. With such critical deviations from
the peculiarity of the master may ultimately also affect the material
be pointed out. Verrocchio's secured works include
there are none made in marble; even with large orders
he left the execution of this material to assistants. In order to
but by no means should the very close relationship with this Madonna
his workshop can be denied. It is safe there, under
his eyes, as indicated by some subtleties. Only are
also the beauties, such as B. head and hand, remained empty without
the loving perfection that Verrocchio gives to these parts
lets grow.

A series of Verrocchiesk Madonna reliefs in clay, Robbia work and
colored stucco leans on with greater or lesser freedom
this marble work and thus proves that the marble relief is
has enjoyed great popularity. One of the most beautiful replicas recognizes
one in the glazed terracotta of the sacristy of S. Croce in Florence
(Fig. 25), of which a colored stucco replica is in the Berlin Museum
possesses (Fig. 26). There was one among the clay replicas
especially captivating through the delicate mildness of the Madonna's head
in the English art trade (at Mr. Dibblee in Manchester), while
a second in the South Kensington Museum in London (No. 7576) the motif
extended, in the execution coarsened (Fig. 27).

All these Madonnas give way more than in the representation of the child
in that of the mother from the sound original of Verrocchio. First
With them the Christ Child stands on the left side while it
at Verrocchio is on the right. Furthermore, these imitators are approaching
Strangely enough, much more so in the form of the child's body
blessing Christ Child of Desiderio on the famous tabernacle of
S. Lorenzo as the child type of her master. In front of some you can
pronounce certain stage names, e.g. B. before that pretty stupid
Marble Madonna of Bargello with the cloud background, which is a work of
Francesco di Simone is (Fig. 28).

Only one of these Madonnas, closely related to Verrocchio - at Mr.
Quincy Shaw in Boston (Fig. 29) - emerges from what has been considered so far
Circles out. In his composition - the Madonna prays seated
the child lying on her lap, an angel who has stepped forward
based - the work is based on the famous four-figure picture of Fra
Filippo returns to the Uffizi. What Verrocchio to thank this master
should be appreciated when looking at his painterly products
become; the reference to the freely used model suffices here. The
very careful, extremely smooth and neat execution that something
stocky proportions of the Christ child, the lovely enthusiasm in the
Head of the angel, based on the David type, the sentimental one
The mood reminds one of Lorenzo di Credi, from whom we come from Verrocchios
know with their own lips that he was active as a sculptor, if not at all
secured sculptural work by him can be proven. The relief
was excavated on a villa formerly belonging to the Medici and
rested on a bronze pedestal, the two porphyry columns with excellent
chiselled bronze capitals. The frame also showed
Verrocchio's taste, like the relief, has a coloristic effect
his style.

Not so much the sculptors as the painters, however
Verrocchio's Madonna ideal made popular. And if there are names
like Botticelli, Ghirlandajo, Perugino, Credi, of the incomparable
Leonardo always apart, come into consideration, so they are allowed to
Their sculpting comrades receive praise for themselves
Freer from their role models of dryness and manners
have held. Of course, even the best of them can achieve this
little the master like them. Was there just one thing in emulation
so independently acting master the danger is doubly close, that
Tender to the weak, to reduce excess to the petty.
To some extent they were all subject to this danger. None
her Madonnas shine as grace and majesty as the one in S.
Maria Nuova hidden terracotta Verrocchios. Have in front of her alone
we have the feeling that we are at the turning point of a development that
Solving the problem of the Madonna. In no other
Madonna des Quattrocento so clearly announces the new attitude of the
High Renaissance, the civil to courtly, the informal
to the solemn, the reluctance of shyness in the reluctance of
Refinement transforms.

[Illustration: Fig. 49. + Malpaga, the castle of Colleoni. +]




X.


Shortly before Christmas in 1473 he passed away in his palace
Viterbo Niccolo Forteguerri, the Cardinal of Teano.

In the cardinal the Church not only lost one of its most loyal ones
spiritual servants, but above all one of their bravest and
most prudent military leader. Apart from its excellent
Abilities had friendly relationships established early on
to Enea Sylvia Piccolomini (later Pope Pius II) the talented
Lawyers started their brilliant career. Since he was from Eugene IV
Appointed administrator of the papal patrimony based in Viterbo
had become, he had an ever increasing preference for residence
in the “city of beautiful fountains” where he is in his palace
recovered from the wars and grew his garden.
The hometown of Pistoja seldom saw him. But she received the famous one
Son always with great pomp, especially in 1460 when he got the red
Hat received, and a few years later before he became papal
Legate went to Pisa to bring the troops to the crusade against the Turks
to gather. Even after the six-year pontificate of Pius II.
he remained in close contact with the Holy See. He did it
Enthronement of the new Pope Paul II, and again that in 1471
Conclave met, Forteguerri's name appeared on the list of
Papabili. In the meantime, it was not he, but Cardinal Rovere who went
The name Sixtus IV assumed from the election.

With the passage of time in the abundant exercise of public
Charity as much as the draft of his benevolent heart
following, the cardinal founded the Liceo in the year of his death
Forteguerri to Pistoja, with the task of continuing to poor students
help. He might be grateful for remembering that in his depressed
Youth the Scholarship of the Operai of S. Jacopo alone him the visit
of the Universities of Bologna and Siena and with it his honorable career
had made possible.

When he was worn out by the rigors of the campaigns on December 21st
1473, barely fifty-four years old, in his beloved Viterbo die
Closing one's eyes, one did not fail to honor one's memory forever. When
Titular Cardinal of San Clemente in Rome, he was buried there and
Mino da Fiesole erected the tomb for him, which we have only been using since 1891
see again in its original form (Fig. 30). At the same time
decided the council of his hometown Pistoja in a meeting of
January 2, 1474, for the erection of a grave of honor in a suitable place
to throw out the sum of 300 gold florins.

Among the five models that were available two years later,
that of Andrea del Verrocchio from Florence the greatest number of
Votes and was accepted for execution (May 5, 1476). Alone
the project soon faced difficulties. First
Verrocchio increased his demand to 350 ducats, and during
about it still the negotiation went back and forth, used part of the
Commission, the Operai of S. Jacopo, the presence of Pieros del
Pollajuolo to get a new model. Now they stood
Opposite parties: Andrea could keep to the contract, for
Piero's model was followed by the family as well as the authority of S. Jacopo
of the deceased and public opinion. In a letter dated
March 11, 1477/78, the Operai turned to their protector Lorenzo
de 'Medici, to whom they presented the models at the same time. With the
undetectable answer is an important document for both us
Lorenzo's artistic taste, as well as his tactful conveyance
got lost between two equally close artists. The
Facts indicate that Lorenzo chose Verrocchio's model
Has decided.

For Verrocchio an unusually cursory clay sketch in the
South Kensington Museum London will be valuable by giving us the
presents a superb composition (Fig. 31). Verrocchio stood
this time a completely different task than with the Medicimonument.
If he had to bring out the dignified in the inconspicuous there, so
the imposing was his only goal without any restriction.
With the imagination of a baroque master who entered with large crowds
painterly play begins and the resistance of the material smiling
Overcome, Verrocchio has the monstrous, of a niche arch
the spanned wall area enlivens. As a motif he chose the dawn of the
eternal bliss, into which the deceased is destined to enter. When
if he has shaken the heavy sleep of death from him, he kneels
Cardinal on the lid of the sarcophagus, and while in the lower
Region the three theological virtues of faith, hope and
of love hovering around him, angels wear almond-shaped glory
Christ himself as a gracious judge to the pious with folded hands
looking up princes of the church. Where those who work next to him
Master only the laying up of the dead in church during the
Knowing how to perpetuate parentation, Verrocchio has action and movement
given by giving the visionary forms that can be perceived by the senses.
The new and original of the composition is not restricted,
if one looks for the upper part with the mandorla on the relief of the
Belt donation from Nanni di Banco over the north door of the Florentine
Domes indicates that not only in the system, but also in individual
Motifs of the angels wearing the mandorla are exemplary for Verrocchio
has been.

[Illustration: Fig. 50. Giovanni Antonio Amadeo. + Tomb of
Bartolommeo Colleoni. +

Marble. Bergamo. Cappella Colleoni.

(The statue made of gilded wood is the work of two German
Artist, 1501.)]

The execution of the work disappoints them in the most sensitive way
Expectations raised by the design (Fig. 32). In rebuke this
Works of art with the "tastelessly treated robes" are all
Critics agree. But they overlook too much that, apart
from the later blemishes, including the original parts
Verrocchio's careful hand was not active. Take it though
Vasari and his scribes the figures of Christ with the angels,
of faith and hope for the master himself as claimed
also in the account books of 1483 only Verrocchio's name
is called, but here the style criticism must be of the documents
and disregard the literary tradition. Neither the guys
with their frozen friendliness still the bulging and desolate ones
crumpled folds make you think of Verrocchio. Here
pupils have been left to their own devices, the
Masters tried to outdo them and thus no external fault
Escaped imitation.

The Verrocchio School, headed by Lorenzo di Credi, has been since
1477/78 documentary evidence in Pistoja; later there is also Agnolo
di Polo is active there. On the other hand, since the same time for
Verrocchio carried out the work in Florence, so that for such a great work,
as his waited in Pistoja, was not even available. His
Group with Thomas and Christ approached completion, at the same time
he had to take care of the silver relief on the St. John's altar and
Already since 1479 he was busy with the preparatory work for his rider
for Venice. In addition, he had the order for the Forteguerrabmal
All kinds of differences entered from the start: the one that was thrown out
The sum did not seem sufficient to him and the advancement of Piero del
Pollajuolo will not have left him insensitive either.
Finally the material didn't suit him either. All reason enough here
only the superintendent, who is near Pistoja and Florence, yes
was easy to lead, to claim for yourself and to execute
To pass on assistants. Lorenzo di Credi comes before everyone else
Employees of the master in question.

The work seems to have been adequately promoted until 1483 among them
to have been. Verrocchio's permanent absence from Florence and his
rapid death then created just as disastrous delay as that
gradually lack of funds. After years of complete standstill, it closed
one with Lorenzetti, Giulio Romano's brother-in-law, whose too
Raphael occasionally for the execution of his three-dimensional designs
served, a new agreement (1514) and Lorenzetti chiseled without
to stick to the model, Caritas with the children and the
kneeling statue of the cardinal. But with this portrait statue that gave way
Artist so much from the intended position as part of the whole
from the fact that there was not enough space to classify them; and so
it is still in the Liceo today (Fig. 33). The completion of the
Back wall gave cause to convert the grave into an altar at which
Every year the feast of St. Bartholomew was celebrated. First
In 1753 Gaetano Masoni placed the sarcophagus with the weak bust and
the hideous weeping putti and led around the niche
tasteless baroque frame that gives the whole barbaric look
increases to unbearable.

A noticeable lack of drafts and sketches proves that Verrocchio
treated the work incidentally and with that, however, boldly and
peculiarly conceived drafts his personal artistic task
considered done. Still, one must have some of the preserved
Clay sketches with this work rather than any other in
Set relationship. This is where the flying angels belong first
Collection Thiers in the Louvre, full of real Verrocchiesken designs
Lovely, in lush curls and stormy fluttering, restless
rich wrinkling. You have set the example for many others who
later appear by name in the work of Robbia. On the
Verrocchio also has traces of Nanni di Banco with tradition
the long-stretched flying angels adopted from antiquity
Broken. A drawing from the Malcolm collection in the British
Museum of London, which is also a study of a mandorla-bearing
Angel is, besides the features of the outward appearances (silver pen,
white heightened on red primed paper) also stylistically the
Marks of the hand of Lorenzo di Credi and may therefore as
Preparation of this for the marble version, however
is considerably lower apply (Fig. 34).

[Illustration: Fig. 51. + Equestrian statue of Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze.

Venice. In front of the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo.]

At no point does the execution differ more decisively from this
Clay design than on the base of the sarcophagus. With a
Thoughtlessness, which almost objection to the authenticity of the sketch
excited, supports the sarcophagus, heavily burdened with the kneeling figure
a winged wreath, very similar to Donatello on the base
attached to his preaching group. Rests in the monument itself
the (not belonging) sarcophagus on a pedestal, the seated one
Shows angel putti with the inscription plaque in relief. These putti too,
which Donatello first used as an inscription bearer are special
popular with Verrocchio's school circles. There are two
Notice types of sitting and walking, one of which is having
fluttering robes and the clean, curly hairs on Credi, der
others with lank hair and sleek camisoles
Francesco di Simone goes back. A particularly good representation of the
first type in its direct connection to the base plate of the
Forteguerrigrabes owns the Berlin Museum (Fig. 35).

There we also find a clay relief with the Entombment, the above
the shape of the intended sarcophagus can provide information.
In my opinion, this has been trained with limitless care
“Sketch” is by far the most beautiful of all Verrocchio's designs
and in its consummation urges increased attention
similar, more carefree work (Fig. 37). In the kneeling
Nicodemus, who is supporting the body of the Lord on the right, has to go without it
Contradiction a portrait can be recognized, so individual are the mild ones
Eyes, the sharply curved nose, the energetic mouth. Lorenzettis
The portrait statue of Forteguerris, executed after 1513, shows im
Profile very related, albeit calmer features, as well as Minos in
Lying statue in Rome, only the curls are missing in both of them.
Nevertheless, the conclusion is probably admissible, in the Nicodemus of the relief
to recognize the cardinal himself. And if we now put this relief in the
Place in the middle of the front wall of the sarcophagus, surrounded by
the family and cardinal coats of arms can be a more meaningful suggestion
the generous charity that distinguished the deceased,
be conceived? And isn't it a deep and poetic thought
the divine in its deepest humiliation and its most glorious
Bringing exaltation into an equally intimate relationship with the deceased?
And finally, where would be for the deathbed of a high servant of the Church?
a more worthy representation than the burial of the one who is his model
was life like dying? So we would have the original
Shape of the sarcophagus analogous to Michelozzo's at the Brancaccigrabe in Naples
to introduce.

In connection with the Forteguerrimonument it should be mentioned
Tabernacle of Francesco di Simone in the Chiesa di Monteluce
Perugia pointed out (Fig. 36). Executed in colored painted marble,
the work strives for the effect of the popular Robbia works. In the
Most of the time, the details only show the student's inability to do so
to strive for emulation of empty imitation, at the same time in that
the blessing Christ Child and the decorative details
of Desiderio's manner, whose relationships to which have already been indicated
Verrocchio and his workshop are perhaps suited to the question
according to Verrocchio's teacher, to find a surprising solution.




XI.


The reasons given to our master by personal condolences
kept away from the work of the Forteguerrabes also determined him,
a similar commission in Florence in the hands of Franceso di Simone
to be entrusted after the composition has been determined. And yet
it was the tomb of someone very close to the Medici
Family.

The marital union of the daughter Francesca des through activities against
the Medicean politics severely compromised Luca Pitti with Giovanni
Tornabuoni, uncle of the Magnifico and head of the Medici
Branch bank in Rome, was in 1466 at the special instigation of Pieros des
Gout fragile occurs. After eleven years of marriage, died on September 23
1477 Francesca from the consequences of childbirth. The corpse was after
Florence transferred and there in S. Maria Novella, where the Tornabuoni her
Hereditary funeral possessed, buried. Verrocchio received the order
to erect the tomb, probably as a result of his close relationships with
the relatives of the family, the Medici. From this grave got
only remains are preserved that no longer allow reconstruction.
Presumably it was on one of the side walls of the tall rood screen,
the 1565 when the interior of the church was renovated by the Grand Duke
Cosimo I. was removed. Hence the main piece, the
Relief with the dying woman in childbed, from the Medicean property in the
Bargello has arrived.

[Illustration: Fig. 52. + Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze. Venice. In front
the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo.]

If we turn to the not entirely clear description of the inventory of the
Medici from 1666, we are allowed to use a sarcophagus
whose corners sat the allegorical figures of virtues, think; on
the front or above the relief was then attached and theirs
The composition ended with the portrait of the deceased in
a medallion. With that, Verrocchio would have a new shape for that too
Private grave found, which was carried on in Benedetto's Strozzig graves
should have.

But the relief that has been preserved alone offers enough of the new and
Peculiar. It falls into two parts, the one without any
architectural separation clearly gives the impression of two separate
Providing space: the nursery with the disaster that occurs
and the anteroom where the dismayed father and friends of the
House (Figs. 38 and 39). The oppressive air of the
civil tragedy strikes us. While right where the
Women who are exhausted are concerned, the loud wailing screams echo,
over there, on the left, the pain in the presence of the men is more wordless,
more restrained, but no less shocking.

The depiction of loud lamentation and desperation in silence
Up to now, pain has been limited to the subject matter of the holy scriptures
remained. Verrocchio's clay relief of the Entombment shows
within how noble limits the master knew how to keep the affects, without
like Donatello, through excess the inner sovereignty of the reproach
to harm or, such as Antonio del Pollajuolo on the leaf
to touch the vulgar with the so-called "Death of Gattamelata".
The master also shows wise moderation on the Tornabuoni relief. The
Old woman pulling her stranded hair at the foot of the bed
and the boy at the head end tearing his pigtails ecstatically with hers
Screaming wide open mouths bring in the shrillest sounds
the harrowing melody of sorrow; but everything sounds around them
to muffled, low sounds down to the faint whimper that of
the lips of the dying tremble. The most moving speech is
the misery in the woman crouched down in front of the bed
stunned surrendered holding hands over ears so as not to hear the shouting
to hear the plaintive and the sighs of the mistress. Listen in the anteroom
the father with the clan on every note that comes out. No doubt
are all portraits, not just the father Giovanni with him
characteristic shopkeeper face of the Florentine merchants, including the
somewhat clumsy youths on the left, those in the elevator only the embarrassed
Mark the shy conventional participants. And now step under the
Group the wistful mother with the newborn and bring them to the father
News that it's coming to an end over there.

With the sure gaze of the playwright, the artist got out of the process
of the painful events, the two moments are singled out in
to whom the main characters of this civil tragedy, the father
and call the mother the highest attendance of the viewer. What him
supported in this, may in part on the tradition of his hometown
can be traced back to the art of exciting storytelling like
was not practiced and mastered anywhere else in Italy; on the other hand, hardly
to a lesser extent the merit of the master remains untouched,
because he has just recognized the most fertile moments.

In spite of the wealth of figures, the composition nowhere loses clarity
and clarity. He is in a free, painterly way
Relief style handled; but the sculptor did not, like Ghiberti,
any encroachments into the seductively neighboring area of ​​the
Painting permitted. He gives no perspective of the premises,
in which we find ourselves. It works exclusively with the bis
in the finest nuances of a portrayal of a great,
passionate emotion that empowers all
Coincidences away to the pure sources of the Eternal Human
leads. Who asks the status and name of these figures? The
The incident is so generally clear that the question of the from
those affected by this misfortune do not stop until the excited participation
cooled down too calmly.

From a technical point of view, the relief cannot be praised for anything good.
Except for broken limbs and bumped heads
Disturb the impression, the marble work is dry and petty. Namely
the folds that Verrocchio could not make rich enough,
shows how mindless the student has transferred the model. Also
in the body proportions, which for the most part are unnaturally compressed
are, of some equally unnaturally elongated women's bodies
apart from that, an insecure student hand reveals itself. The shortening
the slightly inclined bedstead, which incidentally has the shape of the
ancient ~ lectus ~ resting on ornate posts has failed.
The partly empty-friendly, partly sullen heads with their heavy ones
Eyelids and the stiff posture are also indicative of
Francesco di Simone like the piece of arabesque ornament on them
Bedpost.

The same hand is seen in the statuettes of the virtues, the
Madame André preserved in Paris (Figs. 40-43). To the three theological
Virtues, faith, love, hope that should adorn every Christian,
righteousness comes with sword and (missing) scales that
the deceased was probably to be especially praised. In your
I don't even want to go to the conventional attitude anymore
Attributing Verrocchio's invention. In addition, three of these appear
short-legged, stiff-seated allegories in literal repetition
the tomb of the lawyer Tartagni in San Domenico in Bologna,
the signed major works by Francesco di Simone (Fig. 44).

       * * * * *

[Illustration: Fig. 53. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +

(After an original photograph by C. Naya in Venice.)]

The relief with the beheading of John the Baptist, the Verrocchio
Busy around the same time, not only offers substitutes for that
Virtuoso performances in the perspective representation of space,
which one searches in vain on the Tornabuoni relief, but must, since it
is chased in silver for all lost goldsmith's work
Compensate master. The dossale, how to look at the magnificently dainty one
Silver altar called the guild of merchants the patron saint of theirs
Donated father city, was already in 1402 in the Gothicizing
Trecento style completed down to the side panels. The production
of the two bronze doors awarded to Ghiberti, for which like everything
what served for the artistic decoration of the baptistery, the
Calimara guild had to take care of the liquid funds so in
Claimed that the continuation of work on the dossale aside
had to be pushed. Just before the second door was exhibited
Michelozzo 1452 the silver statue of the Baptist for the one left empty
Central niche on the front. Finally in 1477 it was decided that
To have work that has been commissioned for over a hundred years completed.
The choice of stories was natural; after life
of the Baptist in eight reliefs on the front of the departure into the
Desert was depicted until the threatening appearance before Herod,
All that remained for the left side wall was the meeting of the holy women
and the birth, for the right the feast of Herod with the dance
the Salome and the beheading left. The job fell to Antonio
del Pollajuolo and Verrocchio, probably not without the advice of
Medici, who set the tone in the guild. Pollajuolo handed three,
Verrocchio made two wax models. But now a few mingled
proper goldsmiths and offered their craftsmanship with success
at. Eventually the parties agreed to all four artists
to be entrusted with the creation of one relief each (January 13, 1479). At
Verrocchio was beheaded (Fig. 45).

Two statuettes made of clay with the greatest care - the one from
Back seen older warrior reaching for the mace and
the compassionate, curly youth with the bowl - both in possession
of Baron Adolphe Rothschild in Paris, teach the way to know
Verrocchio prepared the work. So he becomes every single figure
Modeled in clay and then sent to the workshop for transfer to the
Have left precious metal. Because an abundance of awkwardness
in the state of the figures and of formal errors that indicate the lack of
Let the student in question close, also necessary
To deny that this relief was executed by the master himself.
Or would Verrocchio ever have one so detailed and yet so
to be guilty of a misunderstood act, as is certainly the case in the model
magnificently performed back figure of the naked executioner?

Verrocchio did the mostly in the representation of the feast
the scene involved and the execution
accompanying figures increased beyond the usual number. Also in
In this relief he proves the playwright's accuracy: he
chooses the moment when the sword of the executioner the reckless
Keeping Herod's promise, and the short span between that
Flashes of the bare edge and the death sigh of the beheaded
the feelings suddenly loud among the witnesses of the sad incident
can be. With the numbness of a guillotine
The executioner brings the machine to a relentless blow; right
one of the aged centurions of the bodyguard is inflamed with them
Action threatening conflict of opinion about the frivolity of this
Murder; over there among the younger warriors there is pity, horror
and loathing. And kneel in the midst of the quarrel of words and feelings
the victim, mute, ready to die, immersed in humility and prayer. Just
a great master could devise these opposites and so effectively
work out.

The relief is a treasure trove for the knowledge of ornamentation
Verrocchio. This is also supported by the care that the person performing
Silversmith precisely these parts of the work, the practice of his
Hand accordingly, has grown. You can find them there
at the washbasin, lion and wolf masks as joint heads observed the
Rosettes and palmettes, the scales on the bracers and greaves,
the dragon wings on the helmet - all decorative forms in this abundance
are not familiar to any other artist of the time. The Koller close,
like the David, so tight that the muscles run through the leather
draws; the gaiters that leave the toes come back again
in front. Hands and feet are very delicately shaped, even with that
small scale of the figures does not lack the indication of the veins and the
Skin folds. The position of the characters is free and secure, and difficult
shortened positions are sought rather than avoided. The one from the back
seen warriors with legs apart, the one in a rising
Anger spreads from the right to the mace in the left
not to shy away from a comparison with Castagno's famous Pippo Spano.
And if so, as with the young man on the left with the wonderfully driven one
Copper bowl, the position seems uncertain and prancing, is flat
only the assistant failed to do justice to the master's intention.

The characters of the two live in the characters shown
most outstanding works of the master, which he simultaneously with
this relief deal with echoes and premonitions. Of the
John's head appears as a slight modification of the Christ who
sympathetic youth like a relative of Thomas in the group
to Or San Michele. In the angry warriors one could study for
Colleoni speculate; here as there the master strives for the expression
wild size.

When Verrocchio takes the gruesome process out of the gloom of the
Prison walls, in which it usually happens, into one
splendid hall relocated in the style of Brunelleschi's pazzi chapel,
so it corresponds to the pursuit of splendor and solemnity, that
is a special feature of his aristocratic art. Be
A feeling of beauty saved him from the aesthetic mistakes of others
Artists who moved the scene a few moments further
showing off with the bloody head on the silver bowl and that
trunk still kneeling with the blood stream that cut through it
Veins in the arch spurting from swelling. Nothing speaks so much for him
perfect art understanding of the master than that he is the highest
dramatic tension with the commandments of beauty in a pure
knew how to bring artistic harmony. The dreadful one
Donatello tried his strength with a certain voluptuousness, she went
Verrocchio's more delicate nature instinctively out of the way.

[Illustration: Fig. 54. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +

(After an original photograph by C. Naya in Venice.)]

Three years after its completion (1480) the dossal was made for the first time
set up, but not as originally intended when
festive cladding wall of the altar table, but as an altar piece.
From the confusing shine of the reflecting in a thousand lights and
You can still use sparkling precious metal with the stones and enamels
nowadays get an impression when the altar as regular since
1483, on the feast of St. John, from the Museo dell 'Opera over
into the baptistery and the glittering shrine above
devoutly agitated crowd like the holy grail glowing.




XII.


No other work leads so deeply into the irregular, often interrupted
and fragmented working method of our master as the main work
its second epoch, the group of Christ and Thomas at the
East facade of the Or San Michele church (Fig. 46). Erected at the
busiest thoroughfare in the city, right in the middle of the one with the
Wide-arched windows decorated front, the work leaves no one
passed without the tribute of admiration and gratitude for his
Creator.

The assignment for this work leads back to the beginnings of the
Verrocchio's artistic activity. When the silk guild (Arte di
Por Santa Maria) in the first half of the fourteenth century
undertook to rebuild the church, committed it (1339)
Mediation of the signory the twelve most powerful guilds and the party
guelfa on each of the thirteen outer pilasters a tabernacle with the
Set up images of their patron saint. While the guilds after
and according to the undertaking entered into, were sufficient, if not
Without a warning from the Signory (1406), the guelfa party met with
1418 measures by awarding her pillar to Donatello with the
Order, in the tabernacle St. Louis of Toulouse, the special one
Patron saint of the Guelphs. The final payment to Donatello
(1423) may also indicate the date of the completion of the whole.

Only the People's Party, always with the Medici at its head
began to dominate public life more victoriously, it succeeded
soon to bring the guelfa party to their memorial. Late 1459
She was forced to take her tabernacle to the College of the Commercial Court
to resign, and in 1463 the paralyzed party was given 150 gold guilders
compensated. Meanwhile the statue of St. Ludwig already removed
been, presumably, to S. Croce, where it is still today above the interior
Main portal stands; the hated coats of arms were chiseled off, and
Luca della Robbias medallion with the emblem of the commercial court
was emblazoned over the tabernacle. This housing that in its pure
Renaissance forms fully satisfied the taste of the time, remained
consist; for the new figurative filling of the niche,
around 1465, Verrocchio.

One can probably assume that the favor of the Medici, with their
Reputation and their money supported the People's Party, Verrocchio too
entered this task. With the help of the documents we can
closely control the slow progress of the great work. The
by far the most frequent payments fall between the years 1476 and 1480.
In 1482 the head of the Mercanzia bought Verrocchio's clay model
and have it set up in their office with the express
Justification that the draft of such a completed work of art received
must stay. In April 1483, just before the date of installation,
becomes the master for his work in respect of its excellence
and superiority over the other statues erected there
A total of 800 gold guilders was awarded. Finally done on June 21st
the setting of the figures in the tabernacle, what that is about
mentioned diary of Luca Landucci reported.

Verrocchio's move to Venice took place regularly
the payouts as well as the completion of the missing ones
Little things impaired. 1487 is made at the request of the master
determined how much money he still owed as the balance; the
outstanding sum that may not exceed 200 gold guilders,
should only be paid to him on the condition that he used it as a
Marriage property for the daughters of his needy brother Tommaso at the
State debt administration deposit, an obligation, the Verrocchio
is complied with in will. The request of the Mercanzia, the
Capitals, the consoles of the supporting base and the coat of arms (in
Wreaths worn by the angels) to be completed is evident
not consistently met; at least the round is still today
of the wreath empty. -

Thomas groping the side wound of the Lord when in doubt about the truth
of the return of his master, is one in the Italian
Plastic is a rare reproach. One of the earliest representations of the
Mystery can be seen on the bronze door of San Paolo Fuori in Rome:
there Thomas approaches the Lord from among the disciples. Shortly before
Verrocchio had Paolo Uccello the process over the door of the now
painted together with the Mercato vecchio church of San Tommaso,
but only incurred Donatello's hurtful ridicule. Verrocchio
was faced with a task that nobody would solve in the sense of the Renaissance
sought, let alone found, before him (Fig. 47).

The coming together of two figures to form a closed group is
one of the most difficult compositional problems. In the present case
the task was made even more difficult by the fact that the existing niche
was originally only intended to accommodate one figure. Through spatial
Nanni di Banco was already limited in the line-up of his four
Saints in the tabernacle of the forge in the worst embarrassment,
to free him from the hand, which only Donatello energetically pruned him
would have known. Verrocchio has the difficulty with that playing and
ingenious ease overcoming even the worst hardship to one
seems to transform welcome chance.

The vibrancy and beauty of the group relies on that
different heights of the figures and their position too
each other. Because Christ, moved into the depths of the niche,
stands raised on a pedestal and with a barely noticeable twist
the pure face view emerges to the right, the shape wins
in importance also according to the mass in front of the profile
disciples approaching deeper plane. Becomes through this opposition
the front and profile position the feeling of space to the strongest
stimulated, resembles the wonderfully speaking, exalted right hand of Christ
with their slight protrusion both the height differences of the position
out as they are also the connection between the levels within which
the figures are intended to convey. How expressive and convincing
is this gesture that moves from eloquent demonstration to blessing
want! How dramatic is Thomas's heartbeat, its outline
with a moving line across the strict architectural framework
pushes out! Almost trembling, this elegantly shaped, but little feel
spiritual hand to the holy place where the lance of Longin the
deep wound on the side. In humility the eyelids drop over them
embarrassed eyes, and the head tilts so that the great silence
Shine from the forehead of the Risen One on the curly hair of the
beloved, now finally won doubters.

[Illustration: Fig. 55. Guidizani. + Medal with the portrait of
Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze. Berlin. Kgl. Coin Cabinet.]

When designing this new, completely independently invented
In Verrocchio, the naturalist has the Semitic type of Christ
Regular character cannot and do not want to overlook. More through the
Purity as through the beauty of the individual forms is at work here. And
how much Verrocchio met the requirements of his time,
proves the judgment of that conscientiously booking Luca Landucci:
this is the most beautiful head of Christ that art has formed so far. In
large, powerful folds, the robe surrounds the body, which is powerful
without fullness, sinewy without thinness, appears as a transfigured body.
The sandals are attached to the feet with simple toggle straps.

Something of the elegance of the rich young man lives in Thomas
Gospel. Scripture knows nothing to report that he was about
towers over the simple fishermen and customs officers through their position and tradition
would have. But the master who finishes the Madonna from her
Bourgeoisie raised to the realm of courtly nobility, ennobled too
the simple disciple of Christ to a youth of noble decency and
Be. In this Thomas the conception of the coming is announced
Century, that, especially under Raphael's example, the hitherto
limited and laborious-looking apostles conform to the ideal of
Cortegiano, that "idea of ​​the aristocratic all-round man"
has approximated. Here Verrocchio anticipates one side of the ideal
shaped: the grace of the external appearance. It also served him
as a means of characterization for the superficial materialist,
which, as it depends on the external appearance of things, also depends on its external appearance
Used care. With intentional taste, these curls are
ordered and seem to smell of fragrant ointment. In multiple
broken, artificial folds, the coat falls over the left one
Shoulder to feet, whose beauty is enhanced by the jewelry of the
Footwear is lifted. The figure is slim and noble, but the
Beauty of the external appearance on which the full daylight falls,
not the expression of deep inwardness: a delicious vessel without
Content. Now the moment has come when she froze in doubt
Soul awakens shamefully to the bliss of which the Master gives her
speaks: Blessed are those who do not see and yet believe.

Among the completely resolved difficulties, these everywhere
Group has commanded during the execution is due to the effortless display
and arrangement of the characteristic limbs, hands and the
Feet the highest praise. Everything is clear and open without blackout
and without being forced into days. In the two different hands
which widen the breast slit is once again, as in focal points,
the characteristic of the two carriers of the action collected and
spatially as close as possible. On the other hand appear
the raised hand of Christ and the laterally extended foot of Thomas
like the widely spaced poles between which the outer and
inner movement twitches and vibrates.

Regardless of these advantages, the work of art is not spared from censure
remained. + Burckhardt + discovered motifs from in the group
most beautiful feeling, also found the movement of Christ powerful
convincing, the two heads almost wonderfully free and beautiful. Nevertheless
he and, to an even more alarming degree, + Rumohr + collided with him
cumbersome, wrinkled folds, on the “very tasteless
treated garments ”. And recently Rumohr's further rebuke
In this group the character disappears from the artist under the
Endeavor to exhaust it completely, still aggravated to that
Motive is generally too low.

This all too one-sidedly emphasizes certain weaknesses of the work
In relation to exhibitions, the
Unity of structure and depth of sensation are emphasized.
In the whole Quattrocento one will find such an impressive,
so safe and round looking for closed group. If anywhere, so
the formal bias of time seems to have been overcome here. Of course
in Thomas's coat the playful restlessness of the little,
complacent fold motifs are criticized, but only as
a tribute that Verrocchio paid to his time. One shied too much
the large open spaces and would rather cut them up than one
exposed himself to the charge of emptiness. In detail all result
these motifs logically result from the movement of the figure; that they heaped us
appear, is due to the training of our sense of form through the
great masters of the classical period. The higher the art rises
Verrocchios, when the joy of the individual was never to the detriment of the
Torn it all away. A wise deliberation has taken care
that the clarity of the motif and the body position nowhere through
the wealth of wrinkles suffer a loss. One likes about the endeavor of the
Masters in the treatment of garments to be of a dissenting opinion
it must be that opposite the Tone Madonna from S. Maria Nuova the
Thomas Group made progress in rounding and easy swelling
which means wrinkles. Vasaris always has this in matters of the profession
Unbiased and unclouded artist's eye recognized. "Thereby
that Andrea, writes the Aretine, the two figures in beautiful and
dressed in well-ordered robes, he proved that he was no less
like Donatello, Ghiberti and the others before him on the art of
Understood arrangements; the work therefore deserves it in
to be erected in a tabernacle by Donatello's hand. "

[Illustration: Fig. 56. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +]

The question of the pathetic in Verrocchio arises in the face
this group consideration and response. Sticks easily
to pathos the connotation of the screwed-up, the phrase-like,
the artificially overheated, the untrue effective at what a
high feeling is deprived of its value. With such a
Insinuation would be done bitterly injustice to the old master. Verrocchios
Pathos is a dignified attitude; it presses for the sublime,
the great, the heroic. Verrocchio seeks the effect, but he does
controls him as he controls himself artistically. He leads the
Sensation to a height that allows the review of all that has gone before
permitted, but at the same time creates breathless tension in the viewer.
The dramatic remains more latent than z. B. with Donatello, but that
The soul unfolds all the more purely as it does not through any external unrest
and passion is pushed back.

All replicas that make up this masterpiece in whole or in
individual parts speak for the high esteem
of work than for the insightful understanding of its merits. In
the colored terracotta bust of Agnolo di Polo (Fig. 48) in the Liceo
Forteguerri at Pistoia the Christ head of the Master is empty and
mindlessly imitated. At the Conservatorio della Quiete, Giovanni della
Robbia modeled the whole group, but they by having Christ and
Thomas put on the same plan for her most striking beauty
brought.

The painters did not miss the model either. Signorelli
repeated the group on a fresco of the Sagristia della Cura des
Loreto Cathedral; Perugino borrowed the Thomas figure from his master
for one of the apostles on the fresco with the handover of the keys in the
Sistine Chapel in Rome.

After all, we find the group entirely and partly with the
Florentine woodcutters who started their business as
Book illustrators begin.

Peculiarities such as the leg bent at the side and bent at the knee
the drapery of the mantle of St. Thomas become artistic at all
Common good and enrich the treasure trove of shapes and motifs
the native to Florence as well as those from neighboring
Local schools provided for immigrant artists. -

Not only in the World Judge (on the Forteguerrigrabmal) and in the
Transfigured this group, Verrocchio embodied his ideal of Christ,
also for the Savior who suffers and dies on the cross he becomes one
have found a new strange expression. But we only have that
scant note from Vasari, concerning the existence of such in wood
carved crucifixes reported.




XIII.


It almost seems as if Verrocchio was chosen for that
one after the great tasks that can be given to the sculptor
the other to undertake and solve. The problem of two figures
to form a closed group follows, last and highest
Demand, the union of horse and rider; the Thomas group, that
Colleona monument; the pathetic the heroic ...

Our gazes rest longer and longer for the period of the Quattrocento
more lovingly on the promoters of the spiritual life than on them
politically active figures in whom admiration
A slight shudder from violence is used to mix blood and murder.
Among them we meet the representatives of the condottieretume,
Mercenary leaders who today feud with their host about whom they
yesterday supported. They stay away from their own politics, and
if they betray them, they do so on behalf of the power that controls them
has taken into her service for the moment. You feel
not bound, they go to their advantage and that of theirs in dear wages
standing tenants. They are at home on all battlefields.
They cross the peninsula from one end to the other with that
Exhilaration to live free and free to die and proud they look from
their heavy-hoofed battle horses down on the huddle below them.

Bartolommeo Colleoni was one of the last of these adventurers
at the same time one of the most magnificent disposition natures. Not his
Only deeds which history honors, his disposition
equally arouses our admiration. There was hatred, vengeance, and envy
far from him. To those who darkened his youth by calling their father
murdered and dragged his mother to prison with him, he forgave.
He was mild to the vanquished and the prisoners. The portraits of the most worthy
of his competitors in the war trade, one Niccolo Piccinini, one
Gattamelata, a Sforza surrounded him in his castle Malpaga and
with envious recognition he praised her merits. Remained sensitive
he against arrogance; a word of hurt from the Doge left him temporarily
break with Venice, in whose service he was almost his entire life,
although the city is his wife Tisbe Martinengo's favorite place to stay
was.

[Illustration: Fig. 57. + The baptism of Christ. + Florence. Academy.]

In search of a permanent place of residence, he chose his hometown
Bergamo as a residence and the nearby Malpaga Castle as
Pleasure stay (Fig. 49). He lived there eighteen years after he
the fortified castle with all kinds of conveniences, rooms for them
Servants etc. had been expanded. Became more and more numerous
the court that the aging man gathered around him. Not less
than six hundred horsemen were with him as his personal
Entourage. Malpaga became the scene of splendid visits to princes,
Tournaments and hunts, but also a place where the sciences
and arts found understanding care.

Here and in Bergamo the mighty man appeared as a builder and lover
of the fine arts, whereby he, as Reumont says, “of his
made use of colossal fortune that honored him more than
many of the means by which it had been brought together. "
He donated a loyal servant of the church near Bergamo in memory
to his late favorite daughter Medea the monastery della Basella
for Clarissines and otherwise gave the church plenty of consideration. Soon
after he, as a real child of the Quattrocento, lost his fame early on
concerned about his burial chapel in S. Maria Maggiore in the upper town
began (Fig. 50), he died on February 1, 1475 in his castle
Malpaga, just 75 years old. "Recommended to the Republic," he said
Venetian ambassadors who stood around his deathbed, “may never
again grant a general such unlimited power as
me."

He left one of the greatest generosity as he was
considerable part of his property belonging to the Venetian Republic.
At the same time, however, he declared with a truly sovereign sense of self
in his will: “He considers himself worthy, most devoted to the
To ask Signorie that she give him an ore equestrian monument to be eternal
Establish a memorial in St. Mark's Square. ”On July 30, 1479, they entered
about this in consultation and made the unanimous decision, the demand
to comply with the testator; only over the square did they keep that
last word before.

But one thing was certain from the start: the monument should be so magnificent
as possible. Artists were called from all sides, from whom one
required the model of a horse; for lay in the formation of the horse
just the difficulty. With those that have been uninterrupted for centuries
artistic relations between Venice and Florence cannot
Miracles take, albeit Verrocchio, an order in this regard
received. First he formed a life-size horse out of white
Wax, "a piece of great beauty". To get it duty free through the
Bringing the Duchy of Ferrara, Verrocchio called the mediation of the
Ferrarese ambassador in Florence and received from the Duke Ercole
free transit guaranteed. The model met in the fall of 1481
in Venice and was with two others by Vellano and Alessandro
Leopardi exhibited. The choice fell on Verrocchio's horse. At the same time
but the schemers began their game and pushed the old Paduan
Master Vellano so that he can make the rider. Verrocchio, the
as a stranger, the less to be resistant to such interventions
felt, destroyed his model by cutting off legs and head,
and turned his back on the city in anger. That let the
Signorie not offer; he shouldn't think of going to Venice
to return, she made him understand that he would be too
cut off the head. Verrocchio did not owe the answer,
anger thrusting the weapon into his hand, which was the Florentine
knew how to master before anyone else. Malicious, sharp and funny
he wrote back: he was not thinking of returning, otherwise
as you wish, but you should find it difficult to find him for the
cut off a new head, nor ever his
To give horses one who would be as beautiful as the one he was instead
that which was shattered could have given him back. These words hit
and struck with benevolent laughter at the artist's joke
the mood in his favor. He called with twice the salary
Senate Verrocchio back. Vellano, so brilliantly cut, pulled
growling home to Padua. The other back, Leopardi, left
volunteered the venue as he was due to irregularities in his
Mint had to flee to Ferrara. Only reaches after Verrocchio's death
this competitor also entered the plant.

The years that Verrocchio were granted until his death has
he mostly, but not exclusively, the equestrian monument
consecrated. There was so little in his way to just put an iron in the fire
How his financial situation has made him accept new orders
required. The draft for the tomb of a doge occupied him
Master temporarily. Then again he poured the artillery pieces for
the great council. Yes, he will take over a few days before his death
an obligation to the King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary
concerning the delivery of a marble fountain (Sept. 27, 1488). So came
it that death overtook him over the unfinished work.

The question of how far Verrocchio prepared and promoted the monument
have encountered all sorts of ambiguities. Vasari erroneously reports
the master died as a result of a cold while casting.
Verrocchio even beats his favorite student in his will
Lorenzo di Credi to the Senate so that “what I started
Work “complete. Meanwhile, Credi passed the order on to someone else
unknown Florentine sculptor Giovanni d'Andrea di Domenico (b.
1455) and explicitly mentions that Verrocchio had the figure and
leave the horse in the clay model. So it would be essential
had not been perfect, faithful Lorenzo would have the glory of his
Master is hardly jeopardized in such a careless way. It
So it was mainly about the casting. Proficient bronze casters
but believed the republic could provide the right man itself,
that Alessandro Leopardi, who as a coin cutter does the fine
Ciselier work certainly understood masterfully. About his dishonesty
she closed one eye magnanimously and called him free with assurance
Escorted back to Venice in 1489.

[Illustration: Fig. 58. + Head of John from the Baptism of Christ. +
Florence. Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Leopardi added the modest ornaments with the utmost restraint
the armor, the bridle and the saddlecloth, poured and gilded
the figure and placed it on the magnificent, with six pillars slender
emerging pedestal (Fig. 51). Your St. Mark's Square, this monstrous one
Reception and fame hall, gave the Venetians for the monument of
after all, not from a foreign military leader. If they instead
They did not care about the place in front of the Scuola di San Marco
Conscience from this scribbling about the clear wording of the will.
And like the master, like the servant. Through the inscription on the saddle girth
~ ALEXANDER LEOPARDVS VF OPVS ~ has Leopardi with well-calculated
Ambiguity of the Abbreviaturen the fame of the work on his person
tries to steer by having the dissolution of the ~ F. ~ in ~ fecit ~ or in
~ fudit ~. It is true that only the
Completion by Leopardi the speech and also Leopardis himself
Gravestone only praises him as the architect of the pedestal. To but
to silence all the voices that the Florentine masters
still about the proudest work of his suddenly broken life
want to bring does not have to be an obscure one at the dead letter
Inscription can be sliced ​​and rotated. The work itself lays clear
enough testimony for his true master.

Two Florentine artists, Paolo Uccello and Andrea del Castagno have
the first authoritative attempts made, equestrian monuments in the sense
of the Renaissance. Their condottier statues on the entrance wall
of the Florentine cathedral are works of painting, but with the
Intention to feign plastic works. Uccello, the twenty year
got to work earlier, has the task with the impetuous
Conscientiousness of the naturalist resolved, Castagno with the urge for it
heroic design, which, however, was called the master's rough peasant style
and since seduced to the clumsy. But just this basic mood
the pathetically excited encountered relatives in Verrocchio, and
Castagnos Niccolo da Tolentino certainly belongs among the works that are
impressed the youthful master's sense of life. To Uccello
he passed heedlessly. As Verrocchio then his model through the
Ferrarese area brought to Venice the artistic
Form of his future Colleoni already too firmly in him to get through
the sight of Baroncellis Reiter (Borso d'Este) in the square of the
Capital or by Donatellos in front of the Santo in Padua
Gattamelata still to be modified. Donatello's rider leads
Uccello's naturalistic endeavors, taking into account the ancient world
new goals. Verrocchios Colleoni achieved the ideal, the Castagno
as a result of a certain dullness and heaviness of its artistic
Imagination only suspected.

If Uccello is still in a strict profile position than his Hawkwood
Conceived relief, Castagno proceeded to a freer spatial picture.
Turning the horse's head out gives him the idea of ​​a
The depth of space that Uccello misses. The ratio is very similar
between Donatello and our master. The Colleoniross also turns
the head from the central axis sideways, to the left. From Castagno has
Verrocchio also adopted the gait of his horse. Not only that
he, taking into account the fashionable pace, made a passerby
rather, the relationship lies in the type of leg position
with the raised forefoot and the far back
Hind leg. Hence both of them are accused of not being free
striding, but a horse pulling an invisible load
to have depicted. You can also use subordinate peculiarities
show the relationship: in the strong folds of the neck, in which
Tuft of hair tied up between the ears like a tuft.

Otherwise Verrocchio is infinitely superior to the older master
(Fig. 52). The strong structure of the horse's body has it on none
End led to clumsiness; there is a lot of elegance in the massive
walking crowd. With an almost graceful curve, a little restless
in outline through the high croup the steed trots along; it is believed
to hear the sound of heavy hooves. The head with the something broad
protruding lower face and the curls parted over the forehead
the mane outshines the broad-mouthed in beauty, in proportion
head of the Castagnorosses uneven at the body. Like it here on one
If it touches the stocky bull's neck, it bends in a beautiful curve
over a neck that is still slender for all its fleshiness. In noble
The nostrils and the fire of the brave stallion puff out violently
sprays out of the eyes.

The anatomy of the animal body is evidence of astonishing expertise. The
With all its muscles, veins and skin folds, she seemed all too contemporaneous
complacently put on display, and so they judged the steed
have the appearance of a skinned horse. We'll get into it exactly
as in the mane carefully laid out in ringlets
observed property of the meticulous detailing everywhere
Determine master anew.

The rider almost sits on this more tight than compact animal
upright straight between the high trestles of the saddle (Figs. 53 and 54).
“Colleoni on horseback,” complains Wölfflin, “has enough energy, one
iron strength, that alone is not the beautiful movement. ”That should
they don't even be. The Venetians sat stiffly in the saddle, and
their way of riding is mocked at the Cortigiano. But here she came
to endow the expression with energy and size in its straightness. It
is the embarrassment of almost all sculptors, the figure of the rider of the
to bring out the mighty expansive mass of the horse.
Verrocchio succeeded.

With the left twisted, as if in a surge of bold defiance
Shoulder, which the head follows, the rider makes the movement of the horse
With. The rider's head clearly and freely overlaps the top of the
Horse and easily dominates over the whole. A balaclava
covers the huge head with threatening eyes. The determination
the movement and the power of the gaze are already at the height of the
new style, the art of the Cinquecento. In David, by the way, too
shows the motif of the exposed shoulder in the bust of Giuliano
we find the preliminary stages to this ruthless magnitude of movement.
But the type is new and surprising. Do we have a portrait?
of Colleoni?

[Illustration: Fig. 59. + Christ's head from the baptism of Christ. + Florence.
Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio never has the Venetian captain face to face
seen. But he was able to be faithful to the Guidizani medal
Take a portrait of his hero (Fig. 55). But it was evident
in his imagination a hero of a more terrifying size
more powerful lion head (~ caput leonis ~) than the toothless one, with a slight weight
overhanging nose and bushy brows powerful, but not
Significantly looking head on the medal. So the master took
in his ideal portrait only a few characteristic details: the
Beardlessness, the powerful neck, the sinister brows and the
blazing look. Otherwise he broke away from all portraits
go with the feeling that the representative of his class must go here
all are represented. This is another train, the Verrocchio
makes it an immediate forerunner of classical art; the
the high renaissance was definitely more weighty
than individual fidelity. Like Michelangelo in the generals of the
Medici graves, Verrocchio also has the character, not the fleeting one
Appearance of personality recorded.

Heads in which the domineering, increased to savagery, is found
said Verrocchio already in the silver relief of the beheading
created by the Baptist. He just needed guys like the two of them
arguing field captains there to resort to the basic form of the
to grasp the new character head. But he had to + one + move now
to the dominant position, which Herod's rude captains did not
suitable: the superiority of a high intelligence. She tames them
ruthless determination in this general's face, it shines
from the menacing eyes, she has the commanding mouth with a pull of
Contempt for the world circumscribes (Fig. 56). Verrocchio chose the age
in which the force of action still holds up unbroken against the first
Signs of diminishing physical freshness, the transition that the
Heroic appearances as the emanation of an indomitable will
leaves. The flesh is already losing its firmness, it hangs down
Wrinkles deepen, but the inner fire burns with old embers.

Compared to those who carefully consider the details
Modeling of the horse's body can only be seen in the large ones
The head applied to the decisive shapes hardly has the same master hand.
There were also voices that supported the whole rider
Leopardi have claimed others to be part of a workforce
thought of Leonardo, who has nowhere really been proven since 1481. who
Leopardi's petite, exclusively decorative species becomes the
reject the first of the two unreasonable demands as resolutely as the second
becomes obsolete by the recently established fact that
Leonardo has been working on the equestrian monument of Sforza in Milan since 1481.
And finally, for the horse it was necessary to show precise knowledge and
Revitalization of large areas; the rider's head had to because of the effect
from on high to be held in great general forms.

Eight years after the master's death, on March 21, 1496, that could
Monument to be unveiled. Since that time the parties have almost
continuously churned, the work of the foreigner to the merit of one
Attributed to locals. The work itself has everything defamatory
Disgraced talk. The Florentine, nobody dares to do it anymore
doubt, the world owes its greatest equestrian monument.
The same Verrocchio who, in the work of his youth, in David, the
Morgenglanz represented young, barely self-conscious heroism,
embodied the hero in his perfection in his last.
Nobody has surpassed his performance, but hardly anyone has his either
still inexperienced art trained on it. Leonardo's Francesco Sforza
perished in the model, and so Albrecht Dürer remains the only one
who with his "Knight Death and the Devil" bears witness, with which
astonished admiration one of the greatest looked up to the "~ statua
gentilissima del gran commendatore ~ ​​“.




XIV.


The figure of the painter Verrocchio cannot be compared with the same
Work out sharpness like that of the sculptor. The material is a
incomparably more restricted, and what laboriously from the absent-mindedness
has been brought together again gives rise to much
Doubt. It is true that by and large there is agreement on what
falls under the artistic term Verrocchio, but what is called the
Master’s own thing to look at remained undecided. Man
also varies with regard to the appreciation of these paintings. Dem
childlike, presumptuous judgment of a French scholar: Verrocchio
would have done wiser if you had ever shut your brush and palette fingers
the overestimation of everything that carries Verrocchio's name,
abruptly opposite.

The written tradition does not provide a secure basis; she is
incomplete and hides their ignorance behind amusing little histories.
According to Vasari, Verrocchio's artistic ambition alone should go to painting
have led, “as one who has excelled in + a +
Areas were not enough ”. How the mood brought him to the art of painting
should he then be displeased with the better performance of his pupil
Driving Leonardo never to touch his brush or palette again.
One is as little in the character of our Master as the other.
His passion for technical experimentation, the appreciation for his time
the art of painting, and the competition with his
Artistic comrades embraced him early on in painting
driven.

A number of lost works are also reported here.
Three large canvas paintings with Hercules, the Albertini 1510
in the room of the old council in the Palazzo Vecchio are perhaps
identical to those mentioned in the Medicine's inventory, which was published in 1495 by the
Signory were confiscated. They also point to that of Antonio del
Pollajuolo preferred subjects like the battle of naked men,
which Verrocchio had intended as a design for a facade and which
also went down.

[Illustration: Fig. 60. + The angels from the baptism of Christ. + Florence.
Academy.

(The kneeling angel on the left by Leonardo da Vinci.)

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Only one of the works received is certified and verifiable:
the baptism of Christ, painted for the Vallombrosan monks at San Salvi
and is currently installed in the Florence Academy (Fig. 57).
The wooden panel is almost square, the figures are about two
Third life-size. The painting has a reputation for being unfinished
be; wrongly, because the monks hardly have an unfinished job
accepted and paid for. If it still gets the impression
of the unfinished, it is due to the impermanence of it
Technology. The madder red in the baptist's coat and in the meat
has faded, so wherever it appeared as a glaze; up to
the degree to which the picture was “completed” is sufficiently shown by the fine ones
Gold braids. With this red in the coat, the light, delicate blue in the
The painting must be similar to the lining and the strong flesh tone
Color mood has shown how Antonios del Pollajuolo's works. At
he is also reminded by the play of light and the metallic sheen of the
Colours.

[Illustration: Fig. 61. + Heads of the kneeling angels from the baptism
Christ + Florence. Academy.

(The head on the left of Leonardo da Vinci.)

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

The figures, especially the Baptist, are sinewy and gaunt
Contour is hard and angular. The modeling goes on all anatomical
Details conscientiously. The peculiarities of the verrocchiesque type
can best be seen on the head of the Baptist: the flatness
of the eye and surrounding parts, the high, arched forehead that
incorporated corners of the mouth (Fig. 58). The folds are flat and
pressed, sheet-like, always plastic.

The Master reveals himself less pure in the figure of the Savior.
Christ appears shifted from the original outline, whereby the
Shape got the insecure state. The technology also gives way to
this part of the painting from the right. Here has one with
more intimately familiar with the effects of oil painting
Traces can also be felt in the head of Christ. We owe her
the softer transitions, the delicate half-light, the airy, loose fullness
of the hair (Fig. 59).

The difference between the two hands is even clearer in
perceptible to the pair of angels kneeling on the left (Fig. 60). The tight
heads together (Fig. 61) lay quite different from two
individualities of nature. The one that only up to the
Hand painted angels visible, goes with painstaking conscientiousness
according to nature. The other who created the angel kneeling in profile,
selects the beautiful line from the rich juxtaposition of the natural model
puts grace in posture, soul in expression and spreads fragrance
and shine over the structure of their artistic imagination. That we
Vasari is allowed to recognize Leonardo in this personality
believe your word. The young master who worked in all parts of the
Figure, not at least in the richness of the garment and that of
Verrocchio there unmistakable wrinkling, too
still in the tuft of grass that is darkly showing against the white piece of clothing
as it were noted with his monogram on the board.

Leonardo is also one of them, albeit with some caveat
landscape leading far into the background. We pursue
the course of the Jordan along the rocky river banks and are in
a Tuscan landscape very similar to that of Leonardo on the
known sheet in the Uffizi with the date 1473. The
rocky backdrop that pushes in on the right and that looks like it is made of iron
showing the cut palm on the left, executed in pure tempera, again
the hand of the older and more severe master.

[Illustration: Fig. 62. Lorenzo di Credi. + The baptism of Christ. +

San Domenico near Fiesole.]

With the wealth of form knowledge that we gain from the in-depth
Consideration of Verrocchio's sculptures can be
dare to draw conclusions about the time of origin of this panel. The
especially in the nude, a somewhat unfree replica of nature and
the wrinkling, that of the wealth and verve of the Thomas group
removed, allow an early emergence to be inferred. A lot
still reminds of the bronze David. If I look at the years around 1470
Discussion, I am in agreement with Vasari's statements
about Leonardo's workforce. Very early, soon after 1465, is
Leonardo had come to Verrocchio's workshop; it is already there in 1472
as an independent master in the guild list. As such, he hardly becomes
have completed more works of his teacher.

Serious and sustained solemnity characterize the basic mood of the
Work. The landscape with its veiled shine is bearing
contributes significantly to raising this mood. But she is not allowed to
Inferences about the landscaper Verrocchio are misused,
who only expressed himself very modestly in this picture.
Compared to the predecessors, who presented the same material,
a Baldovinetti, Fra Angelico, even Piero della Francesca,
Verrocchio asserts himself as an innovator, not in the traditional one
Position of the figures to each other, but rather in the freedom of
Movement and the illusion of space by giving up the rigid profile and
Facestations. In this respect no example can be traced back to
On the other hand, Verrocchio's baptism has eagerly established a school like that
Altarpiece by Lorenzo di Credi in San Domenico near Fiesole (Fig. 62)
and Ghirlandaios fresco in S. Andrea zu Brozzi near Florence.

A second plaque that Vasari considered particularly successful in the possession of
The nuns of San Domenico in Florence are mentioned in a post
manifold wanderings now to Budapest in the National Gallery
preserved enthroned Madonna recognized with saints and angels.
The painting shows verrocchieske if it is poorly preserved
Shaping, but by no means the care and the sensation that from
handwritten works of the Master of the Baptism of Christ are inseparable.
Heard with some, compositionally closely related images
according to its rather rough execution, it is only our workshop
Master on.

According to the latest research, it is particularly fertile
the activity of the master as a Madonna painter. But remains of the
many of the Madonna pictures slipped to him, there is only one thing left
can boast of hand-made execution. The Madonna still won't
in Berlin (Fig. 63), a picture that was once at the center of the loud
Quarreling about the artist Verrocchio stood, duly appreciated
neither of its eminent art-historical significance, nor his
according to artistic merits. And yet no other teaches
Blackboard, not even the baptism of Christ, that is the painter's nerves
Verrocchio know as this with biting scorn and compassionate mockery
showered image.

Maria, visible up to her knees, sits in a rocky landscape with the
Children on the lap with its arms stretched out towards its mother. This
The motif is already known from the master's sculptural Madonnas;
only here the child is sitting on the mother's lap and is more restless
shown moving. We find all characteristics in the head of the Madonna
verrocchiesker design, also that gracefully differs from the fine ones
Smiles spreading from the corners of the mouth are not missed. The Christ Child
in its buxom abundance is related to the male fish. With the
The richness of its overlap and the audacity of its foreshortening
puts this child's body from a knowledgeable as well as careful
Master hand testimony.

Even if the first impression of the painting is not necessarily
is more captivating, so it is, similar to the baptism of Christ
the state of conservation. The yellowish incarnate with the heavy ones
brown shadow bothers. Again it is said that the painting is unfinished.
I mean, however, that the glazes have also been rubbed off here and
now the brown background in the meat comes to light. Because
the details are extremely fine, neatly clean: the finely meshed
The fabric of the veil hanging under the child's feet,
the hems on the cherry-red robe, the pattern on the brocade sleeves
the tied laces, the ornament on the heavy wooden disc,
which forms the halo of Mary. In all of this he reveals himself
Artisans.

The bright, metallic shimmering colors indicate the baptism of Christ.
Everything is bright and cool like in the pictures of the Pollajuoli.
The same cold light blue of the coat lining here as there, the same
oriental-colored cloth, which is wound around the child's body here,
there serves as a loincloth for the person to be baptized.

A serious aesthetic reproach clings to the hands of the Berliners
Madonna "with the ugly nails". But they are exactly the same for a short time
cut, black-rimmed nails, which are also found at Botticelli
and who is used to pollajuoli without hesitation. The nail care
is a toilet art still unknown in the Quattrocento. Furthermore
shows the left hand of the, which is only visible in its entire extent
Madonna all the characteristics of the master: secure access, with
three-dimensional sharpness captured outline, the finely modeled wrist,
the folds of skin on the bent thumb joint and the dimple between
the fourth and fifth fingers. The school doesn't often have this hand
Repeat enough, it is also found in the adoration of the
Kings of Leonardo in the Uffizi.

[Illustration: Fig. 63. + Maria with the child. + Berlin, Königl. Museums.
Gemäldegalerie.]

The landscape uses elements that relate to the baptism of Christ
to repeat. The boulder there is from right to left
On the side, and the bit of mountainous land with the bushy one
Tree growth that appears under the Baptist's raised arm
even with the detail of the horn-shaped jagged mountain too
recognized on the Madonna. But one must free oneself from that
Prejudice to see the landscape poet in Verrocchio,
who only appeared with Leonardo. The landscape has only secondary
Meaning in our master's art. It doesn't occur to him, for example
to increase the interest in the landscape through accessories.
It should only liven up the background. On closer inspection you can tell
however, how true Verrocchio remains even in the incidental.
It keeps the distance soft and airy, leaving the outline in the air
flicker in that radiant Italian air, the indefinite
Does not tolerate forms; it becomes plastic and determined after the
Foreground, and yet everything is still discreetly stepping back against that
strong relief of the figurative, which asserts itself undiminished. Just
He lacks the nuance for the delicate intermingling of the reasons
the color and therefore also the maturity of observation. With the
His heart is in the new landscaping direction, the untrue with the
A backdrop system built on top of one another from the Trecento has broken.
His peculiarity, however, saves him from the stereotypically recurring one
Arno Ebene also for his part to discover for himself and her with loyalty
to portray the portraitist.

[Illustration: Fig. 64. + Maria with the child. + Frankfurt a. M.,
Collection of Mr. H. von Mumm.]

The motif of the painting is based on Fra Filippo's so-called four-figure picture
back to the Uffizi. Nonetheless, Verrocchio stayed with everyone
unfree imitation far away. He has also taken off his type of madonna
that of the Frate. The length and width ratios of the
Heads show a striking relationship between the two painters. Also
Trifles are from the very worldly art of
Dominicans have been taken over by Verrocchio: the almost artificial
Arrangement of the veil with horn-like ornamentation that
Preference for jewelry and precious stones. Him to a student because of it
Making Fra Filippo is not acceptable because its picturesque
Expressed, his technique is completely different from that of old Lippi
is different. Should be a teacher in painting for Verrocchio
be made famous, I don't know anyone better than Alesso
To propose Baldovinetti, the savvy experimenter, with whom too
the Pollajuoli went to school. That would be the
Explain stubbornness with which a certain group of art historians
before all the paintings of our master and his school
always insists on the name Pollajuolo. That would also be in
the workshop of Verrocchio's popular motif of the enthroned Madonna
Saints in front of tree-lofted barriers (see fig. 2, 75) on his
true origin.

A whole group of images of the Madonna comes close
of this original work. The motif most accurately takes up a Madonna,
the Herr von Mumm in Frankfurt a. M. owns (Fig. 64). Three others
Panel paintings in Berlin (fig. 65), in London with Mr. Butler and im
Städel Institute in Frankfurt a. M. lean in the composition
more like the Marble Madonna of Bargello. The isolated position
which we (p. 54) assigned to Mr. Shaw's Madonna relief, takes
the Madonna with the Angels in London
(National Gallery No. 296, Fig. 66). All of these paintings stand out
by the conscientious, almost pedantic cleanliness of the technology; your
There is weakness in the soul. You have something rigid in your expression
as well as their folds and their contours touch metallic hardness.
These pictures of the Madonna have recently been cultivated by Francesco Botticini
to assign to a carefully executed but not very peculiar
Master who, without being Verrocchio's immediate assistant, is completely
is under the impression of Verrocchio's work.

Botticini now also belongs to the beautiful altarpiece in the academy
Florence, on which the archangels meet little Tobias with the strange one
Bring the eye balm home to the sick father (Fig. 67). The picture for the
Chapel of Gino Capponi painted in St. Spirito in Florence, already bears
the more common name Botticelli since the sixteenth century;
one understands how easily the mix-up could take place. Fewer
It is understandable how this free, grandly solemn composition
with a master who is nowhere else about tradition and
has got beyond a fearful symmetry. We will
can only explain it by looking at Verrocchio's spiritual part
hold tight and send only the painterly execution to Botticini.

“Young Tobias' hike with an angel or with three
is predominantly, if not exclusively, painted for the home
as a recommendation of a certain youth in the heavenly
Protection "(Burckhardt). Perhaps in our picture one can go to the
think little Alessandro Capponi, the last born of the ten children
of Gino and Maddalena, who went to Lyon at a young age,
to represent the family's commercial interests there. There
then did they put up his picture like him in the family chapel at home
under the guidance of the archangels on the rough paths of the stranger
The way.

[Illustration: Fig. 65. + Maria with the child. + Berlin, Königl. Museums.
Picture gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

The charge offered everything a painter's heart from the second
Half of the Quattrocento. Loud young, graceful ones
Shape. The movement is light and lively, the emotional connection
tender and tender, the robes varied and rich, the landscape
enticing. Not quite this wealth is from the painter's art
been exhausted. The pairwise similarity of the
male types in Michael and Tobias and the female at
Exit Raphael and Gabriel; but there is something about the grace of their faces
Biased, unfree. The hands in which so much in-depth study
verrocchio-like shapes are revealed, repeat themselves several times
in their positions; a pentiment on the hands of the middle group
shows how the painter struggled, the easy interlocking
of the angel and the still shy boy. So fresh and
the two heavenly wingmen urge forward vigorously in the
Middle group stops moving; it is as if they were preventing each other
between his legs compressing wrinkles the archangel striding.
The material is treated with the greatest care and with that light
Joy in the colorful, shiny and ostentatious that the costume designs
of the outgoing Quattrocento is particularly characteristic. The
Wrinkles are expressly allowed to use a pattern from LB Alberti
recommended "moving accessories". For the restless
The fluttering garb of Gabriel appears which once appeared in the gardens of the
Medici, now placed in the first corridor of the Uffizi
antique Pomona (No. 75) to have given the motifs. With devotional
Love are the highlights and reflections on the bare walls
of armor studies; the fist with the mighty one, made of purple velvet
Sheath drawn sword is reflected in the breastplate as well
the fingers gleam on the shiny ball that makes them so delicate
hold. All hems, ruffs, ribbons, laces, buckles and
Locks indicate the hand that takes pleasure in the delicate; also
the ornamented dotted halos indicate this. This is
not Verrocchio himself, but has a very close relationship with him,
just like the sharp outline with the fine edge of light that in hers
Rigidity of curls reminiscent of the allonge wig, the spreading
of the little finger and many other details incessantly
remember him. But Francesco Botticini reveals himself completely in the
Landscape with its atmospheric view of the river plain. they
is exactly like the valley landscape on the great coronation of Mary
in London (No. 1126), the so-called Matteo Palmieri picture, which,
due to a similar confusion of names like our Tobias picture, Sandro
Botticelli was attributed. Baldovinettis lives in this landscape
The role model continued, the Verrocchio in the works that undoubtedly belong to him
is far more independent. The flowers and perennials on the
rocky path are observed with Leonardesque naturalness.
The lizard on the left on the rock is less allowed to enjoy this advantage
to boast. The shaggy mutt, a disdainful offspring, has failed completely
of the "little dog" that the biblical poet gives the traveler to the side.

[Illustration: Fig. 66. + Mary with the child and angels. +

London, National Gallery.]

The solemn solemnity felt by no scheme
restricted composition, also the charm of the landscape below
always use their magic when it comes to the
artistic evaluation of the board. Our style-critical
Discussions will have sufficiently shown how far this effect is
may be linked to Verrocchio's fame. Botticini is never one more
such a work succeeded. From himself we have a pretty weak one,
Replica of the middle group once intended for the Badia in Florence
(Florence, Academy); a second, more imprecise and fleeting, also in
The Morelli Collection at Bergamo has a smaller scale.
Tobias in London (National Gallery No. 781, Fig. 68) is stirring
visible from the same hand as the Madonna located there
with angels (fig. 66). Also for these and all dependent images
Botticini comes into consideration; this sharpness and hardness on the one hand, this
On the other hand, one shouldn't look for sweetness in Verrocchio. Of the
The engraving in Paris made the panel famous (Fig. 69)
Customer, of which only the right part with St. Gabriel get himself
but who certainly reproduced the whole composition, like that of
Tobias cutting in coat ends proves. Its author, the group
belonging to the Baldini beaker, bears the name of the master of the fine
Manner.

The circle of paintings related to Verrocchio,
is not yet closed with this, but that is what is being considered
Anything left over, too loosely related to one's own
masterful hand to take up more space here. Dem
According to objects, most of them fall into a couple of women's heads
Berlin and Vienna. From Tommaso's memorandum we learn
that Andrea for Lorenzo de 'Medici the portrait of Lucrezia de' Donati
who painted the tournament sung by Pulci in honor of Lorenzo in 1469
hosted. The Berlin portrait (Fig. 70) with the equally threatening
like tantalizing inscription: "Don't touch me" on the front
and the hopeless love lament on the back: “Hardly me
possessed, 'I had to cry for it too', however, offers itself to the
Assumption that this is Lorenzo's lover painted by Verrocchio's hand
receive. A delicate romance novel seems to evolve from a saying to
to weave others across. But the painting itself bears, I think,
so clearly all traces of the youthful hand of Lorenzo di Credi,
that competes with the smooth technique of an enamel painter that
the fantasy of the languishing and tormented couple about it
must evaporate. I keep the portrait of a woman in Vienna no less
Prince Liechtenstein (Fig. 20) for the work of a Verrocchio pupil
and none other than that of Leonardo da Vinci (see also p. 46).

[Illustration: Fig. 67. + The Journey of Tobias. + Florence, Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

       * * * * *

Unfortunately, the considerable number of alleged drawings by the master is standing
in inverse proportion to the number of those executed by hand
Leaves. These can be counted among the greatest rarities, like
she also takes first place artistically after the unattainable
Take in hand drawings of Leonardo. Who about in them so-called
Sculpture drawings, only fleetingly the large lines of a composition
presumed defining outline, will be amazed at the unmeasured
Diligence, thorough work-through, with all the momentum of the
Sensation clean line. There is no shortage of fast ones either
Notes of a motive of movement, but then the pen draws the same
delicate and definite lines in the executed study sheets
the charcoal pencil draws on it. Unfortunately, these are some of the most beautiful
Drawings by an inexperienced hand have been passed over, so that
many subtleties are lost forever, and only for the discerning
The shimmer of former beauty still shines on the examiners.

[Illustration: Fig. 68. + The Journey of Tobias. + London, National
Gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

Such blemishes tarnish the impression of that chalk drawing
in the Uffizi with the downward-looking angel's head from which the
Research has to proceed (Fig. 71). A tear through the left side
Patched up hole on the cheek, rough hatching, misunderstood
Addition of the eyelashes, heavy dragging of the lightly
and free curls from the crown, the perforation
the outline for the purpose of the break - all these hardships of later
Hand damage the leaf in the most sensitive way, but still have
cannot touch the magic that is mysterious and difficult in
To interpret words lies above the shapes of this boy's head. Everything
here is charm and innocence: the one half above the flexible neck
sloping curly hair, the downcast eyes, the high, pure one
Forehead, the beautifully moving mouth. This still seems strangely touching
life not unfolded, this still closed soul-bud. On
warm sunbeam, a first triumph, a hidden awareness
Life force - and the smile of the young David flashes too
these still dreamlike children's trains. The snug softness
of the hair on top of the head, its delicate frizz around the head
and neck, the beautifully curved round of the eye bones
delicate shapes of the snub nose, the butterfly-like across the broad
laid face, swaying play of lights with his
The eye follows the illuminated shadow with delight.

It is temptingly close, in this mind, to study one of the
recognize two kneeling angels in the picture with the baptism of Christ
want, all the more so as the drawing bears the holes of the break. But
apart from the fact that this perforation is raw and clumsy and
therefore was by no means made by Verrocchio, the
Similarity between drawing and image is limited.

Related, but less determined in terms of shape and already ans
Grazing sweetish is possessed by an upward looking similar head
by Mr. A. von Beckerath in Berlin (Fig. 72). In the view and
The shape shows a close relationship with the angel on the Madonna
in London (Fig. 66), which is reinforced by the fact that on the
Back of the sheet, unfortunately cut off just below the mouth that
Study of the angel's head on the opposite side of the same picture
is preserved.

A large female head that goes with the Malcolm Collection
British Museum has come to London, remembered in all peculiarities
so striking about the angel's head in the Uffizi that undoubtedly also in
a drawing of Verrocchio lies before us (fig. 73). And his
nicest, how one may sit down. Same technique - black
Chalk on white, slightly ripped paper - the same wide oval
with the high forehead, the same inclination of the head with the lowered ones
Lids, the same, still dreamily closed charm in the expression.
Unfortunately the same condition with rough revisions. The
Hair has been passed over, the outlines reinforced, the shadows partially
blackened.

[Illustration: Fig. 69. Master of the so-called fine manner.
+ Gabriel. +

Copper engraving. Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale.]

Vasari praises “some women heads with beautiful expressions and richer ones
Hairstyle that, because of its beauty, Leonardo da Vinci always
imitated ". Who would doubt that we are in London
Drawing one of these heads? Because the hair trim has that
Artists especially busy here.

The joy of all sorts of fashionable decorations that have been in Florence since
the middle of the fifteenth century
also on the hairstyle. The hair to the allure of back then
to increase the esteemed tall woman's forehead becomes sharp from the face
combed, brushed behind the ears and, intertwined in many ways and
laced up, tucked into a silk cap on the back of the head,
the tips of which cover the ears. That's how almost all the beautiful ones look
Florentine women who Domenico Veneziano painted or who in
the so-called Desiderio busts have been preserved. The whole face remains of
Any hair accessory will be free, even the eyebrows and eyelashes
shaved and torn out with tweezers. The whole mass of the hair
serves as jewelry exclusively for the back of the head. Around 1470 changes
this fashion. The hat releases the hair on the temples, which is now
neatly pinned on in curls or hanging down in loose strands
Cover ears.

[Illustration: Fig. 70. Lorenzo di Credi. + Portrait of a girl. +

Berlin, Königl. Museums. Picture gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

This is how the woman in the drawing in London wears her hair. The braids,
intertwined and knotted, are with their fine, thin
Ends collected at the height of the crown and there by a clasp
held together; They fall loosely over the temples and ears
wavy down on the shoulders. No wonder Leonardo had that
took as a model. We hear him scientifically do the hairstyle too
sought to fathom. From the eddies that form a water with a steep gradient
around rammed pegs, stimulated his imagination
to new hair styles. By analogy, Leonardo recognized them
Laws according to which hair could be arranged; are they too?
Linguistic terms all refer to the properties of water
taken over.

Verrocchio did not go that far; but you can also see him here as
Forerunners and pioneers, if not as scouts. And still
Leonardo admired a second in these heads: the beauty of the
Expression. The forms are neither slim nor fine; the tenderly nervous
Leonardesque beauties will be looked for in vain. You own one
healthy freshness. But it sounds like that angel's head at the Uffizi
Melody of this soul soft and muffled. Something veiled lies
over this womanly being. The dreamy that so touching
looks downcast eyes, the nobility of pure femininity, who
that forehead shines - that captured Leonardo. Himself
came from a distinguished family, felt a kindred spirit here
addressed. And never again does he remember such figures
abandoned his teacher. It works in some of his early Madonnas
with particular vivacity.

The thorough care that Verrocchio took on the study of the
Child's body related, confirms a sheet used on both sides
in the Louvre, which Morelli has brought in deserved honors.
It shows quick pen drawings of naked boys on both sides
youngest age in various positions. Standing,
sitting, lying, walking, from the front, from the back with the pulled up
Leg, arm raised - the master struggles over and over again
compared to the round, curly model that we have seen in the fish man
and got to know the Terracotta Madonna in the Infant Jesus. There are
motifs quickly caught, as the restlessness of the little ones is necessary
made, only motion notes, ~ notations du geste enfantin ~. Namely
caused by the pulled leg in the front view
Foreshortening occupies the careful master. Everything is only fleeting
indicated; the line of unequal strength, now strong and thick,
now delicate and light, now full of playful grace, now trembling as in
nervous haste. But the rule over the form always asserts itself.
On the back (Fig. 74) a contemporary has something bumpy
Hexameters composed a praise to the master "Varochius",
which makes the drawing unnecessarily documentary
appears secured.

[Illustration: Fig. 71. + Angel's head looking downwards. +

Chalk drawing. Florence, Uffizi Gallery.]

The formal font of this sheet must be kept in mind,
around the main stock of alleged drawings by Verrocchio as a work
of a certain student from the Master's work once and for all
turn off. The twenty-five sheets of pen drawings that are now
in Paris (12), Chantilly (8), Dijon (1), London (2), Berlin (1) and
Hamburg (1) are scattered, once formed, like dimensions, type of paper
and watermarks, a bundle, the so-called sketchbook of
Verrocchio. The vast majority of those previously accumulated in Paris
Leaves suggests that the whole thing, unfortunately, to the
Edges trimmed, once in French private ownership and
Not taken apart and scattered until the nineteenth century
has been.

The sheets are covered on both sides with pen drawings and
also contain numerous draft letters and ~ ricordi ~. The
depicted objects change in the greatest variety
from. Consistent composition ideas emerge: a burial chapel,
a constantly changing Madonna motif, sitting up with the child
the lap, adoring before the boy Jesus, enthroned by an angel
venerated, a resurrection of Christ, figures of saints, individually and
united in groups; then again equestrian and horse studies, boy
Stutzer in a fashionable costume with dogs in the paddock, two cooper,
a coat of arms and naked putti. Some things are reminiscent of certain
Models: a study of nudes based on Verrocchio's David, based on one of the horses
the ancient team of four on the roof of San Marco in Venice
Hercules with the lion skin after Antonio del Pollajuolo, a sea centaur
with a woman after Riccio. Should Verrocchio himself and others
have copied? If you look closer, you are amazed at the rough
and unsteady hand that has guided the pen here. And again:
Verrocchio should have drawn that, especially just before his
Deaths, such as the occasionally noted date 1487 and the reminiscences
to prove Venetian works of art? No doubt we have one
drawing sculptors see before us, but this one in the basic
The one who feels uncertain about body conditions is never the shapely one
Master of the Louvre Leaf.

[Illustration: Fig. 72. + Angel's head looking upwards. +
Chalk drawing.

Berlin, collection of Mr. A. von Beckerath.]

[Illustration: Fig. 73. + female head. + Chalk drawing. London,
British Museum.]

Leads to the maker of these highly questionable achievements
even more certain than the style-critical analysis of content and letter form
of the handwritten records. We find there (on the
Hamburger Blatte) the note of two putti like “that of Andrea
del Verrocchio ”, which Andrea did not list as such
will have. The handwriting itself shows striking resemblance
that of Francesco di Simone (facsimile at Pini). His
We have already touched on close relations with Verrocchio; we know
also that he worked in Venice and that he had a chapel in
S. Giobbe, and finally the sketchbook contains the exact study of the
blessing Christ Child, which Francesco at the tabernacle of the Chiesa di
Monteluce near Perugia (see p. 47). Well also explain
the copies and the lack of independence that a master like Andrea
may not be expected. What to do against Francesco's authorship
has stated that there is a son of the same name in the margin notes
mentioned, while the sons had other names, is highly based
probably due to a read error. So everything is together
in order, as Morelli first did, in the sketchbook the work “one
weak pupil ”, that of Francesco di Simone
is. With the disclosure of these sheets, the drawings of the
Verrocchio limited to those three or four whose quality is glorious
the master comes to equip more than the quantity of the others
ever could.

[Illustration: Fig. 74. + Children's studies. + Pen drawing. Paris, Louvre.

(After a photograph kindly received by Mr. Jean Guiffrey in Paris
provided.)]




XV.


                      ~ el chiaro fonte
  de humanitade e innata gentileza
  che ala pictura et ala sculptura e un ponte
  sopra del quale se passa cum destrezza
  l'alto Andrea del Verrocchio ~ ...

With these verses Giovanni Santi has in his busy rhyming chronicle
proclaims the praise of the "high" Master. And what he can boast about him
found, shows better insight and a more lively sense of art than
the conventional comparison with Lysippus and Phidias, to which the
antiquarian scholarship of Ugolino Verino soared
Has. But the two eulogists agree on one thing. A bridge,
which leads safely across to the promised land of the arts calls him
Giovanni Santi, and Ugolino speaks of the spring from which they all,
"Whose name flies through the Tyrrhenian cities", their skills
have scooped. His contemporaries seem even higher than his works
to have given up his teaching activity. And if there is one
emphatic exaggeration is that in order to be in a parable of time too
talk, more students have emerged from Verrocchio's workshop
as a warrior from the belly of the Trojan horse, his role model and
his teachings have left deep traces and on development
the Florentine art had a lasting effect. The word "student" is allowed
should not be conceived too narrowly, but lies in the direct
artistic offspring only the smaller fame of the Verrocchio workshop
decided. However, like almost everywhere and always, from that
only Leonardo is in sight.

Among these students, Lorenzo di Credi (1459-1537) has the heart
closest to the Master. More than anyone else
Lorenzo was allowed to give him a hand. Contracted by Verrocchio
Accepted work receives credits for independent execution.
When Andrea is in Venice, he visits him several times and equips
detailed workshop reports. Credi inherits the entire artistic
Legacy and he leads the body of the dead master out of the
Lagoon city in the crypt of San Ambrogio.

From the goldsmith's art, just like his master, Lorenzo came to
The artist's workshop at the time when Andrea “~ per un suo
cosi fatto umore ~ ​​“, as Vasari naively says, leaned towards painting.
We have recently learned from documents that Verrocchio has obligations
with the cathedral authorities in Pistoja for the oratorio of the
To deliver a painting to Vergine di Piazza; 1485 becomes the authority
presently, that has not been reportedly for more than six years
to complete the completed picture and from Verrocchio's workshop
to have it brought to its destination. There, in which meanwhile to
Sacrament Chapel converted oratory, houses the painting
still today as a work by Lorenzo di Credi (fig. 75). This is
also undoubtedly the name that must be pronounced in front of the picture.
As for the Forteguerrimonument, so Verrocchio has for the Pistojeser
Dombild just took artistic responsibility, everything
but leave others to Credi. And maybe just did the work
at that tomb the young painter about the completion of the picture
held so that "more than six years later" the official
Memory had to take place. Nothing is gained by assuming
Verrocchio gave Lorenzo the draft, the composition. The
Scheme of the enthroned Madonna with saints in front of marble walls is
the usual in the master's workshop. The execution shows in each
Brushstroke the embarrassingly clean, here still youthful squeamish one
Hand credits. With all delicacy, she rounds the forms and distributes them
the colors up to enamel-like smoothness. The architecture is so good
understood how pleasing the landscape. Verrocchio's design
is reproduced down to the smallest details, but everything is more sober,
more home-made, without panache. The colors are also Verrocchio's
known: a sharp blue, a deep wine red, a cold purple with
Yellow. The goldsmith's patient fingers have this Persian one
Painted carpet. The preservation of the tablet is no less evidence of this
the diligence of execution. To Leonardo, the workshop mate,
reminds the way trees and leaves are dark against a light background
are silhouetted. Also suggests a preserved study in form and
Technique - silver pen on reddish primed paper - inevitable
on Credi: the drawing of St. John the Baptist
Left. A beautiful one in the Dresden Kupferstichkabinet, yes
The revised study of the Madonna is probably also best with
Relate Credi and the Madonna on this first work
(Fig. 76).

The Madonna with St. Leonardus and St. Julian (?) In the museum
zu Naples (Fig. 77) is on the same level of style and shares
poor condition, all characteristics of the Pistojesian picture. Credi
later received several of this in the Verrocchio workshop
made use of the usual compositional scheme. Also in his forms
You can feel the indelible memory until the end of your life
to his master. Credi's children's figurines all hang from Verrocchios
Example. In a carefully executed picture of the penitent
Magdalena in the Berlin Museum he transmits an occasional, through
particularly fine painting excellent statuette Verrocchio,
also in the Berlin Museum (Fig. 78) without any significant change
the wooden panel.

It remains striking that Credi does not have independent sculptural work
has undertaken. Know that he had the necessary prior knowledge
we from the mouth of his master himself. With some certainty have
we also in Credi to the manager of the marble workshop in Pistoja
Time of the construction of the Forteguerri tomb. Meanwhile
there was nothing to be reported about his work there. He has
later picked up the hammer and chisel again, maybe about that
Heraldic shield with the two angels in the great hall of the
Chisel town house of Pistoja (Fig. 79), a work exceedingly
shows clear relationships with the school of Verrocchio and in the
Cleanliness of the marble treatment as in the occasional clumsiness
of the composition, the artist who performed the tomb in the
close cathedral suggests.

[Illustration: Fig. 75. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna with Johannes dem
Baptist and St. Zeno. + Pistoja, Dom.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

What does Verrocchio like about this hard-working but artistically unproductive
Talent to have drawn to this star with borrowed light? Was
it is that "pure source of kindness and tender feeling",
which Giovanni Santi praises? Or the attachment, adoration and
Loyalty, here as often the smaller talent to the beloved master
proven? What human could have linked the two is
lost in the silence of history; not even one of those
cheap artist anecdotes plays with uncertain light over the
away from both figures. Only what united them artistically can still do
be recognized. And then the experience repeats itself that the great
Masters who are conscientious handlers are often closer than ingenious ones
Student. Especially the manual side of the art exercise, the technical one
Credi was well aware of the skill that Verrocchio placed so much importance on
to acquire with a care bordering on the pedantic. Vasari, the
Credi has known personally, tells how hardly larger pictures
came from his easel, since even the smaller give him limitless
Made trouble. He has to respond to Verrocchio's technical experiments
have had a careful eye; until his maturity he tried to
to steadily increase the durability and smoothness of its colors.
He succeeded in this to a greater degree than the products
his brush make it appear absolutely desirable. Like him
himself, only died of old age in 1537, so is his
Art, which you never notice the Cinquecento, to old age
Gone fundamental. His fame lies in his relationship with Verrocchio,
in his devotion, which was as unconditional as his reliability.

[Illustration: Fig. 76. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna study. +
Silver pen drawing.

Dresden, Kupferstich-Kabinett.]

Just as little is the originality of Francesco di Simone, his
Traces we have met so often in the work of Verrocchio. To a
Francesco is a little younger than Verrocchio in years
Completed an apprenticeship in the Andreas workshop. His main work, the
Marble tomb of the lawyer Tartagni in San Domenico in Bologna
(1477; Fig. 44), is in the structure and ornamentation by Desiderio
depending, in the figurative and in the folds it shows the model
of Verrocchio to the point of becoming dependent and with almost all faults,
which the overzealous imitator never escapes. The work is clean and
conscientious to the point of pettiness. One can hardly speak of invention
and the ornamental overload shows no finer one
Taste. The same defects affect the rest of the work
of the sculptor, whose association with Verrocchio personally and
artistically was looser than the relationship with Credi.

[Illustration: Fig. 77. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna with two saints. +

Naples, museum.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

The works in baked clay carried out by the hand of Agnolo di
Polo were seen everywhere in Florence, we can, maybe the
Due to the instability of their material, no longer prove. Some
Replacement, however, in order to ensure that Verrocchio's aftermath on Florence was entirely
Observing the peculiar field of plastic art offers one
certain group of Robbia works. Madonnas in puffy robes
and coat, the Christ Child on a pillow next to him, flown around by
the angels of Forteguerri's grave, repetitions of entire compositions
Verrocchios, the baptism of Christ, the beheading of John, the
Thomas miracle, putti that are related by blood to those of Verrocchio,
are found in this category. They lead in terms of art history
into the studio of the last of the three Robbia masters, Giovannis, and
speak rather for the popularity of the originals used than that they
exposed the ingenuity of the imitator. With this work
Second and third hand, Verrocchio's art is popular
become. They are more common in the provinces than in Florence
itself. It is as if the "prosperous city" had an abundance of it
given away, with it also the most modest village church between the
Vineyards of the Arno plain, the most remote monastery on the ridge of the
The mountains have a part in the marvelous growth within their walls.

Again and again, however, one comes across painters when one looks at Verrocchios
Want to overlook acting as a teacher in full. In Botticellis
Youth development he is the deciding factor, and Ghirlandaio
comes under rule with his first steps
Verrocchiesker shapes and compositions. That proves how well known
and must have been the painting workshop of our master,
that workshop where the technical experiment, priming and
Rubbing the colors, their mixture and luminosity, in short everything for
Craftsmen operated with such scientific thoroughness
became that apparently the production of the master himself about it
came up short.

Not just the local artists, but also the wandering artists
has recorded this planting site of detailed technical studies.
Florence formed especially for the neighboring Umbrian masters
the college of artistic creation that nobody can pass by
should. The long-standing relationship between Perugia and
Florence was particularly close in the Quattrocento. So was
for also the young Perugino from his first master in art
it was always pointed out: nowhere else than in Florence lived so many
excellent masters, especially so many capable painters. The that
said Fiorenzo di Lorenzo had, to judge by his works,
the blessing of the Florentine school, especially the suggestion of
Verrocchio here, experienced in yourself. Perugino followed his advice,
and what he learned under Verrocchio forms the iron structure of his
Ability, so firmly settled in him that it is also about the sad
Slingshot work of his later period has not been lost
is. Perugino's Madonnas with the demurely downcast eyes that
typical foot position of his saints, the spread hand movements,
the arrangement of the cloak over the robe, his naked children with
the limbs "turned as if on a lathe" - all of this is possible
back to Verrocchio as well as his emptiness over the years
Pathos sinks to the caricature of a masterly virtue.

[Illustration: Fig. 78. + The atoning Magdalena. +

Clay statuette, old painted and gilded.

Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

With Credi and Perugino he is finally staying in Verrocchios
Workshop to which the word Dante from Homer applies “~ sovra gili
altri com 'aquila vola ~ “: Leonardo da Vinci. Vasari knew what
he did when he was introducing this undeniably greatest
Italian artist started a new section of his biographical
Work began. The Proömium with which Vasari this new third part
introduces, describes in a quick retrospect once again the laborious one
Up; then the wide summit view opens up over the promised land
the high renaissance. And as the first figure of a fully developed
High renaissance master Leonardo appears. His merits will be
Put in the brightest light: the supernatural grace, the inspiration of the
Shape, the rich abundance of forms, the delicate melt of the color.
No reference to Verrocchio, with whom everything is like in germ cells
is preformed. No praise to this master, whose greatest fame it
henceforth it remains to have trained such a student. With
a feeling of elation, as if he had taken an active part, says Vasari
overcoming "that dry, sharp and hard method" of
Quattrocento artists with their almost headstrong penchant for the difficult
Executable and often unpleasant too. This artistically
Vasari’s judgment of Verrocchio is only one-sided
understandable: here I have study and hard work like no other
Artists who made up for shortcomings in natural talent.

[Illustration: Fig. 79. Verrocchio's workshop. + Angel with the +
(broken) + coat of arms of the city of Pistoja +. Marble. In the great hall of the
Town house in Pistoja.]

To the historian the one, Verrocchio, appears only to be unconditional
Preliminary stage to the other, Leonardo, because nature doesn't make leaps.
What started with the teacher is developing into full bloom
at the student. It is often as if Verrocchio's entire art world was one
Microcosm of Leonardo's artistic universe. We got from the
scientific studies Andreas heard of his employment
with the music, his thorough technical knowledge on all
Areas of artistic creation and we understand that only in his
Workshop Leonardo's genius could find the right breeding ground.

For such a lively, restlessly searching mind like Leonardo, however, offered
this workshop and this teacher are also dangerous. The manifold
the incoming orders attracted the curiosity of a technical one
Area over to the other. Verrocchios in all matters of
Handicraft pedantic thoroughness was passed on to Leonardo,
but at the same time a capricious fragmentation of the labor force,
a tendency towards theoretical brooding, technical speculation.

About a more intimate personal relationship between the artists
nothing is reported. But if Leonardo was still in the guild
registered master stays with Verrocchio for years, so
may, also considering Leonardo's amiable manners,
to be concluded on a good agreement, which Vasari for free with
tried to tarnish the jealousy of the elder. The artistic
The connection between the two has been so close that criticism is still frequent today
it is unclear to whom of them certain indistinguishable works
must belong.

For our purpose, however, the question of dependence arises
Leonardus von Verrocchio back against the after the retroactive effect of
brilliant pupil on his surroundings.

For the young people who worked with Leonardo at Verrocchio,
such an artistic reaction is certain. Without Leonardos
In spite of Verrocchio, neither Credi nor Perugino would be role models
become what we know them to be. But now the master himself?
The facts are strangely luring. Before Leonardo's entry into the workshop
we cannot date a single work by Verrocchio, with one exception
maybe of David's. Then with the outcome of the sixties continues
the proud row one in hardly interrupted sequence, with increasing
artistic freedom, from the delicate to the graceful, from the graceful
to the great. An overcoming that ascends from level to level
the ~ maniera alquanto dura e crudetta ~ can be determined
The parallels with Leonardo become more and more numerous. Should this
from work to work free and deepened art of unfolding
busy master with the surprisingly long stay
Leonardo's workshop until 1480 without any causal connection?

Again and again, especially from the French side, there is such a thing
Context, that is to say, a constantly growing dependency
Verrocchios has been asserted by Leonardo's artistic ideals.
Hopefully the previous chapters have been very wrong
presented. Verrocchio's development is so natural that
so compellingly logical solely from his artistic disposition that
an intervention by the higher genius Leonardos unnecessary, even inappropriate
appears. Anyone who does not think they can do without one has
like a bad dramatic poet, the character of his hero
kinked instead of developing it consistently in an ascending line.

What wrestles in Verrocchio's art and wants to free itself without them
To be able to completely shed the shackles, this uncommon spirit, the “after
strived for a stricter and deeper justification ”- that is exactly what I wanted
makes it understandable and lovable to us Germans. It's this one
Chaining strong talent with almost scientific brooding that
Has always been a feature of German art. Such talents
searching workers, do not create primarily for those who enjoy,
as she does not find satisfaction even in sheer beautiful appearance
Find. They drag heavily on their thoughts. Even in the best case
are they a transition, a bridge, ~ un ponte sopra del quale se
passa cum destrezza ~ as the old Giovanni Santi wrote. they
are plowman and sower, the sowing of which depends on the soil
that she falls. If this soil was fertile arable land, then their lot is theirs
to step back like the farmer, the one of the well-cultivated field
The hour of the bell rings home.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Verrocchio, by Hans Mackowsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VERROCCHIO ***

***** This file should be named 63924-0.txt or 63924-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/9/2/63924/

Produced by Peter Becker, Reiner Ruf, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one - the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away - you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark / copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-TM electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. lake
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-TM electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation "or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
All references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-TM name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
Immediate access to the full Project Gutenberg-TM License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII "or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  Payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Gutenberg Project
  Literary Archive Foundation. "

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s / he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinued
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund "described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
Receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-TM is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection wants
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501 (c) (3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Gutenberg Literary Project
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Gutenberg Project
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-TM depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($ 1 to $ 5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-TM concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Verrocchio, by Hans Mackowsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Verrocchio

Author: Hans Mackowsky

Editor: Hermann Knackfuß

Release Date: November 30, 2020 [EBook # 63924]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VERROCCHIO ***




Produced by Peter Becker, Reiner Ruf, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






  ################################################# ##################

                     Notes on the transcription

    The present text was based on the book edition published in 1901
    reproduced as faithfully as possible. Typographic
    Errors were tacitly corrected. Unusual and
    ancient spellings remain compared to the original
    unchanged; Quotes in foreign languages ​​were not corrected.

    Some pictures were moved between the paragraphs and to
    Part grouped accordingly so as not to impair the flow of text.

    The original was set in Gothic script. Special
    Font styles were created using the following special characters
    marked:

        Underlined: _Underlined_
        Bold: = equal sign =
        locked: + plus sign +
        Antiqua: ~ Tilden ~

  ################################################# ##################




                          Lover editions

                            [Illustration]




                         Artist monographs

                Issued in association with others

                                  from

                              H. Snapfoot


                                  LII

                              Verrocchio


                       = Bielefeld = and = Leipzig =
                     Published by Velhagen & Klasing

                                 1901




                              Verrocchio

                                  From

                            Hans Mackowsky

     With 80 illustrations after paintings, drawings and sculptures.

                            [Illustration]


                       = Bielefeld = and = Leipzig =
                     Published by Velhagen & Klasing

                                 1901




This work is particularly luxurious for lovers and friends
equipped books except for this edition

_a numbered edition_

of which only 50 copies are on extra art paper
are made. Each copy is carefully numbered in the press
(from 1-50) and tied in a rich leather strap. The price
such a copy is 20 M. A reprint of the numbered
Edition that every bookstore accepts orders for will not
organized.

    The publishing company.


Printed by Fischer & Wittig in Leipzig.




Content.


                                                                   page

       I. The judgment of posterity 3

      II. The environment 4

     III. External living conditions. Appearance and shape 8

      IV. Education, apprenticeship and first works 13

       V. David 19

      VI. The Medicigrabmal 26

     VII. The boy with the dolphin 34

    VIII. Minor work for the Medici. Busts. Reliefs.
            Wax figures. Verrocchio as a restorer of antiquity
            and party decorator 40

      IX. Madonnas 52

       X. The grave of honor of Cardinal Forteguerri 55

      XI. The marble relief from the tomb of Francesca Tornabuoni. -
            The silver relief on the St. John's Altar 60

     XII. Christ and Thomas at Or San Michele 65

    XIII. The equestrian monument of Colleoni 70

     XIV. Paintings and drawings 76

      XV. The school. Leonardo da vinci 95




[Illustration: + Andrea del Verrocchio. +

(Woodcut in the second edition of Vasari's artist biographies
from the year 1568.)]




Verrocchio.




I.


The fame that an artist enjoys is solely decisive for his own
Worth and talent? The name that is repeated over and over is the safest
Guarantee for the size of the vanished championship? And gives
only the stately number of widely visible works to an artist violence
and continue to work into the future? As soon as these and similar questions
are raised, Verrocchio falls short of the requirements that
one puts back to the artist of the highest rank and growth. Be
Name does not echo through the centuries with the same ore sound,
that separate us from him; the crowd of his admirers is not like that
peoples' congregation swelled like the most glorious
unmistakably crowded. And even if one of his not exactly
numerous works that Colleoni enjoys the undisputed fame that
to be the most beautiful equestrian monument in the world, that was it for this work
not reserved to be a role model and model for future generations
become.

To the unreachable who sat at the tables of plenty
Verrocchio doesn't belong. But neither is he one of those who are only the
Thanks to faithful scientific research for a painstakingly preserved existence.
Goethe occasionally calls him “a thinking, thoroughly theoretical
well-founded man "and has, without having approached the master,
with these words probably captured the impression that one had at the time
associated with the name Verrocchio. First the understanding of our day
Verrocchio also benefited the masters of the Quattrocento.
But this revaluation happened too quickly, and the newly awakened one
Enthusiasm made itself felt with an overly high assessment of the
Artist's air. The understandable desire, the humble life's work of
by no means fruitful artist of the newly won valuation of his
Increasing talent accordingly drew works of art into the circle of
Contemplation that is only of suggestion, not Verrocchio's own hand
owe their existence. The opposition has overzealous opposition
raised and distorted the image of the master into small things, like those in the
Formless had increased. So there are judgments
which ultimately only prove how far you can go from the untroubled
Knowledge of the nature of the Master is removed. The way there too
reached, Wilhelm Bode, the most deserving of all, had years ago
Researcher on Verrocchio, directed; "It is, it says with him,
To isolate Verrocchio from the wavering and indistinct ensemble
the work of his workshop in order to characterize his own. "

His very own! But the versatility of the artist does that
first steps unsafe and dangerous. We are inadequate about him
informed. We only know that he sculpted and painted,
that he was the goldsmith and the study of perspective as well
who cultivated music. If we can trust Vasari, it was Verrocchio
generally more inclined to study things than to production, and
Goethe would have it better than anyone with the thinking, absolutely
theoretically based man characterized.

[Illustration: Fig. 1. Lorenzo di Credi. + Portrait of Andrea del
Verrocchio. +

Florence, Uffizi Gallery.]

Let us now consider the small number of certain works of his
skillful, deliberate and sensitive hand, we almost have
only works of sculpture before us. And by ourselves
We shall familiarize ourselves with the form and content of these works
get so clear ideas of the peculiarity of their master that
we also in the area of ​​the others, demonstrably cultivated by him
Arts hope to recognize one's property. From the thinking, absolutely
theoretically founded man becomes the
Artist gradually grow up, who, by the power of his talent
raised beyond the limits of the century, prepared the way and
made the path right for the greater ones who came after him.
Apart from Donatello and Quercia, there was no other in the Quattrocento
Quattrocentist like Verrocchio. Compared to them, it lacks
Art the timeless, the eternal. But with success he has the tradition
overcome, nothing conventional clings to it. Any task given to him
was placed, he has freely out of his artistic feeling,
solved without looking after a model. Everything is pressing with him
already on the Cinquecento. How he started the new century with his own
Eyes was not allowed to look, so he is also in line with his art
the threshold, in the forecourt. He points over with a gesture like in
the images of the time of John, the forerunner of Christ, of the Savior
indicates. And the stronger who came after him, in whose world fame the
more modest Verrocchios rose, was his own pupil and
Assistant to Leonardo da Vinci.




II.


At the time Verrocchio's talent was developing, that appears
artistic life in Florence more colorful and eventful than in the first
Decades of the fifteenth century. The bearers of the artistic
Thoughts are of course considerably smaller than that
Conquering family, that of the early Renaissance the decisive victories
won. Brunelleschi has already retired, Donatello is staying in
Northern Italy, LB Alberti lives, devoted to theoretical studies, in
Rome. Ghiberti, greatly aged, is near the grave.

In 1452, the so-called
Gates of Paradise at the Florentine Baptistery and show the new one
picturesque relief style combined with a goldsmith-like clean
Detail treatment. That may appear in the frame of the door
earliest example of the naturalistic arabesque emerged
from the idealization of the high festivities at the church doors
usual decoration. In S. Croce, the Florentine pantheon,
become the grave monuments of Leonardo Bruni and Carlo Marzuppini
built. In them the organic is revealed for the first time
Combination of ancient and naturalistic elements, the more serious
Bernardo Rossellino approaches more ancient form, the more imaginative
Desiderio da Settignano his naturalistic feeling more freely
leaves. In the delicacy of the relief treatment with the lightened
Shadows, in the use of different colored stones, make themselves felt
clearly the pursuit of a painterly effect and coloristic charm
valid. The colored terracottas of Luca della Robbia, the colorful
painted clay figures and stucco reliefs that were popular around the same time
clearly reveal the value that was attached to polychromy.
With regard to the material, the ore was in the highest esteem,
not only because of the proximity and the abundance of the marble quarries
Stone would have devalued at all, but because bronze is the greater
technical skill required, the delicacy of the form down to the
finest offshoots and especially in the delightful game
of light and dark, created by gilding and patination in the
Opposites could be exacerbated, the pursuit of painterly
Effect excellent. Since the last with Ghiberti in 1455
living grandmasters of bronze casting showed up
the younger generation is trying to force what the liquid,
but hard-to-tame ore would have done better and purer. The
The crowd of lucky heirs followed the conquerors of a new style
to discover, expand, expand with an insatiable joy,
with the most skilled hands in the world, with a limitless one
A desire for combinations and an abundance of delicate ideas.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. + Madonna enthroned with St. Laurentius and
the St. Georg + bronze plaque. Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

You felt so firm and secure on the newly acquired land that
close to the golden tree of life with its ever wider
spreading branches could also take root the gray theory.
The question of the primacy of the arts, which seems insignificant today,
in particular the competition between painting and sculpture,
currently filled all workshops and study rooms with persistent
Noise and found an echo in all art theory
Writings that came to light in long succession. Already Ghiberti
confessed that his love belonged to the greater part of the art of painting;
LB Alberti admits to painting by showing her position and
Appreciation from the vaunted elderly with a great effort
investigated in historical learning, the noblest rank
among all arts one. Filarete recognizes that the sculpture does
is more difficult to practice than painting, since it is less important to the artist
the opportunity to correct oneself is offered by nature too
come extremely close, but painting is "nature itself".
Later, Leonardo also raised the heatedly disputed question in favor of the
Painting decided, and one thing was needed so completely in the plastic
Form rooting genius like Michelangelo's and the excavation of the
colorless Roman antiquities, in order to sculpture the hitherto from painting
to grant the place of honor held.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. + Grave slab of Cosimo de 'Medici. +

Florence, San Lorenzo.]

And yet the Florentines were ahead of all other Italian tribes
by nature for the reliable capture of the plastic form more than
gifted for coloring, and her painting has certainly adapted to the
always developing leading plastic. Without Donatello there are painters
like Fra Filippo, Paolo Uccello, Andrea del Castagno, also Botticelli
and Ghirlandajo unthinkable. The generation, the Verrocchio
listens, seeks to practically mediate the competition between the arts.
Engage the most enterprising, energetic and gifted
in several areas of the performing arts to meet their ambitions
satisfy, or seek, with varying degrees of luck, those in the plastic
to utilize the results obtained for painting. The experiment will
under certain circumstances, an end in itself and the best are subject to them
often the danger of the work and technical tinkering
affect its preservation. This group is called by
Artists, whose most distinctive character is Antonio del Pollajuolo
has to apply with the name of the painter-sculptor, but includes the word
sometimes too little. They can rightly be called the versatile
in contrast to the all-rounders, on whose achievements theirs
Efforts are based, and to the one-sided who in their art only that
practice the relevant guild craft according to their abilities. The
Versatile, insofar as they are artists, means depicting nature
the relentless rendering of what is clearly and soberly seen
into the details. But they don't just want to look, they want to
fathom, imitate lawfully. The doctor is in them all
Body. And because they are clever Florentines, not soft, dreamy ones
Venetians, do they often dwell longer on the scientific problem,
more insistent and stubborn than it would be for her art practice
rewarded. Your perspective studies expand under the
Participation of deeply learned mathematicians in geometric spatial analysis
the most difficult construction, their study of the naked penetrates to the top
to the limit, which later the anatomists with knife and scissors
exceed. They research and brood. The calls from the gardens
of life they respond with defensive serenity, like Paolo
Uccello to the wife waiting in the bedchamber from his nocturnal
Study table calls over: What a lovely thing this is
Perspective!

[Illustration: Fig. 4. + David. + Bronze. Florence, Museo Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 5. + head of David. + Bronze. Florence, Museo
Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Such an artistically and theoretically crystallizing
Verrocchio's fate has shown the world. With the described
He shares all peculiarities, a gift, with kindred spirits and convictions
meanwhile, which they all lack, lifts his person significantly from the
Cooperative out: a purified sense of beauty. And that this
took over the leading voice in the harmony of his abilities,
often increases his art to the level of unrestricted mastery.




III.


The surname del Verrocchio suggests no particular merit in this
artistic organism of the master, such as the sharp
captivating look; there is no nickname in the epithet.
Our artist is also not one of the members of the
Documents of the time often mentioned Verrocchi family.
Rather, he put the surname in grateful memory of his
Teacher, the goldsmith Giuliano de 'Verrocchi. His family,
the Cioni are to be found in a very modest middle class.
His father, Michele, a brick maker, had on his
in the old days took up the more convenient occupation of a toll collector.
He was past fifty when Mona Gemma gave him his son
Andrea gave birth. The year is not quite certain; contrary to the general
Valid assumption is based on the master's cadastral entries in 1436
as the year of birth. Grew up with four sisters and two brothers
Andrea on under the care of his stepmother Nannina after the
own mother died soon after his birth; to the household
also belonged to Mona Ghita, the grandmother. The relationship to the
Stepmother seems to have remained a warm and untroubled
at least she has Andrea with her after her father's death in 1452
keep in the house. We are interested in the older of the siblings
Sister Mona Tita, who married a barber, and their children,
two daughters and a son who lived in Verrocchio's house; then a
younger brother, Tommaso, a cloth weaver, whose poverty is numerous
Verrocchio's progeny sometimes fell hard.

We learn almost nothing about external life events. in the
The year of his father's death, 1452, the misfortune struck our artist,
that he was playing with his peers outside the gates with one
unfortunate stone throwing a wool worker fatally. The court
stepped in, but acquitted the negligent. His teenage years are
filled in with theoretical studies; he brought particular zeal
Against geometry. At the same time he took care of the music, probably already
as a child, as was the custom of the time. He learned sounds
beat and recite, with the main purpose of the then
pursued musical instruction: the organ rich and capable of modulation
close. In vain, however, would we imagine
of the scope of his musical talent and activity.

Then the apprenticeship approaches him. Florence has always been home
the goldsmiths who have their stalls, one close to the other, on the
Ponte vecchio had opened. The great masters had before him
all started in the goldsmith's workshop; Verrocchio also attacked
first of all to this craft, which also nourishes his master well
promised. But one activity alone was enough for the young man's ambition
Artist not. So he did painting and architecture, wood carving and
Perspective. He must have romped around in that circle of
Theorists who like Baldovinetti and Pollajuolo as their leaders
looked up.

It was not until the sixties that light came into the semi-darkness of this
Artist life. Verrocchio enters into close relations with the
ruling family of the Medici, and now he soon shines younger
Fame. He is also active for the Rucellai; in that by Marcotti
famous Zibaldone by Giovanni Rucellai are several
Unfortunately, Verrocchio's work for the family has no further description of the
Item listed.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. + David. +

(Photo in the correct view after the plaster cast.)]

More and more he grows together with his workshop. We don't hear from anyone
public appearance, no quarrel with an adversary robs him of the
Quiet to work, no voluntary work affects the well applied
Hours of his days. The storms that rush through his time
break on the walls of this workshop, hardly that the noise of the
Pazziv conspiracy, which was nevertheless to the Giuliano de '
Medici cost his life, shooing him away from work for a moment.
But this work is not a regular artistic production.
Verrocchio loves inventing, tinkering and tinkering. All sorts of things
Experiments, e.g. B. Shaping above nature in a soft,
pulverized stone mass, which is similar to plaster, take its time.
Occasionally we marvel at the number of years that his work has
standing around in the workshop. Because as carefully as he carries out, so rich
he designs the individual, the time he needs to complete,
is not always in proportion to the scope of the service.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. + Old pedestal for the David of Verrocchio. +

(The bust, added later, represents the Grand Duke Ferdinand I of
Tuscany.) Florence, Palazzo vecchio.]

Vasari would like to stay in Florence for most of his life
Verrocchios fills up, interrupting with a visit to Rome. Sixtus IV.
is said to have called our artist to the papal court so that he could
make twelve statues of the apostles for the Sistine Chapel. But in the
The name Verrocchios appears in the account books of the papal curia
nowhere, and we know the goldsmiths and silversmiths, the Sixtus'
Enjoyed favor, as much as the sculptors. Added to that is that
Vasari also allegedly in Rome regarding another of Verrocchio's
manufactured work, the Tornabuoni dig, has been proven to be wrong, so
that we have to deny the artist's stay there.

Only in the last few years of his relatively short life did
he the dome of his hometown, probably with a heavy heart like all his
Compatriots, lost sight. Happy years were for him in Venice
not decided. With the erection of the equestrian monument there
for the condottiere Colleoni there were manifold insults,
Jealousies and rivalries that go beyond death
Master should affect his artistic property.
Whether these frictions the self-conscious and, it seems, easy
Vulnerable people have broken earlier than one might expect
remain open. He died in Venice in 1488, probably briefly
Time after the last contract with King Matthias Corvinus von
Hungary, for whom he was supposed to work a well (August 27, 1488);
because already in October of the same year mentioned his favorite student
Lorenzo di Credi the master as deceased. Contrary to his last
Will, which he drew up in June 1488, was the corpse to Florence
and buried there in the family crypt of S. Ambrogio.
But in the seventeenth century the grave was already in vain
with the simple inscription that Vasari narrates, wanted.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. + Tomb of Piero and Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, old sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by Gebr. Alinari in Florence.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 9. + Left part of the sarcophagus of Piero and
Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio remained celibate. For his loved ones he has been magnanimous
taken care of down to his Famulus Giusto. From the nieces who gave him
who ran the house in Florence, one of them still had during Verrocchio's lifetime
married an honorable dyer, the second a cooper, both of them
thanks to the dowry their uncle prescribed for them. His two houses
in the district of S. Ambrogio in Florence, one of which to one
Was rented out to the male heirs. The
the artistic legacy came to Lorenzo di Credi.

The master's appearance is in a portrait of Lorenzo
di Credi in the Uffizi Gallery (Fig. 1), its authenticity
has recently been unjustly doubted and that essentially
corresponds to the woodcut shown by Vasari (see p.
Cover photo). From the full beardless face look below steeply
arched eyebrows a pair of deeply sharp and calm eyes
Clarity, the nose is not noble, but well formed, the mouth over
the double chin finely drawn and tightly closed; from the pure,
well-rounded forehead is the light cloth cap on the half-length, in
Neck curly hair pulled back. The meaty but delicately educated
Hands rest slightly on top of each other. The double chin, the broad chest
and the short, fat arm suggest a certain plumpness
middle shape close. The one on the left side to the open window
incident light plays clearly but soberly on the forms and
Surfaces. The most prominent trait is high intelligence.
The pedantry and homely bakedness that goes with this peaceful homestead
seems peculiar to the clean but sweeping brush Credis
ascribed to the model. A pathetic increase like her
revealed in the woodcut, Credi was not capable.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. + Part of the lid from the sarcophagus of Piero and
Giovanni de 'Medici. +

Florence, sacristy of San Lorenzo.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

So he gave us the guild more than the artist in the picture.
And maybe those who have the painting as a self-portrait
Peruginos said they were offended by the dose of couch potatoes
it contains and which is incompatible with Verrocchio. Because Andrea wasn't
Curmudgeon and not a hermit. Nonetheless, he was a thinking artist
in love with solitude, an enemy of pomp, noise and din. In front
getting sleepy, this highest danger of all, deal with yourself
The living, kept his artistic soul of the rivalry with the capable
Comrades, the struggle of the opposing directions, the sharp criticism
of his contemporaries, in short, all those advantages that were found in the places of the
big traffic like Florence was to be found alone.




IV.


Among the most difficult problems that are problematic in this everywhere
An artist's career requires a solution, the question of which belongs
Verrocchios teacher. Older sources that Vasari verifiably knew
and used, unanimously make the artist one of the last
and Donatello's most outstanding student. But if the biographer himself
If he is completely silent about it, it comes under serious criticism
like his literary models. The joint work of the two
Artist at the basin of San Lorenzo, the Vasari in Donatello's life
is told, through Albertini's memorials, the older one
credible source, refuted. Besides, Donatello was just in the
Years in which Verrocchio's apprenticeship would have to fall from Florence
absent. And finally we hardly find one in the master's works
Train leading to Donatello. Where the object, such as the Colleoni,
challenges a comparison with Donatello, we see a conscious one
Verrocchio deviates from his presumed role model. The technical one
Donatello's clumsy bronze casting is Verrocchio's virtuoso
Treatment of the ore against the dramatically agitated mobility
Donatello's pathetic serenity of Verrocchio, the easy,
sketchy litter the deliberate, fussy, gourmet
Care. If a relationship between the two is to be determined, then may
we are most likely to stick to Pomponius Gauricus, who in
his book Verrocchio den, published in 1502 on sculpture
"Donatello's rival, but only when he was already an old man",
designated.

On the further look around for the teacher it is tempting to with
Bernardo Rossellino to linger. The boy is supposed to go to Vasari
Verrocchio the Madonna with the angels in the lunette of the Bruni tomb in
S. Croce have worked. But also here chronological and predominate
technical concerns. Leonardo Bruni, the State Secretary of the Florentines
Republic, died 1444; it is not to be assumed that one will receive the honor
the deserving statesman and historiographer of the republic
delayed. An eight or nine year old, like Verrocchio
that was, but you will not want to trust a marble Madonna,
not even if, like the one in question, they artistically deny
other parts of the tomb is inferior.

So we limit ourselves for Verrocchio, as for so many artists
in his day, then, the instruction in a goldsmith's workshop
to be accepted, namely with that Giuliano Verrocchi, the del
Migliore makes a name. Remember his later work with
their delight in clean details, their delicacy and the high
technical skill that distinguishes them from such an apprenticeship.
For what this teaching place denied him, he found sufficient
artistic inspiration in the works that arose around him, and
which has already been referred to.

The pupil of the noble blacksmith was also initially in the
learned art and that into the mature man years
into it, as Cellini expressly assures. From the samples of his
There is no longer any artistry. We only hear from two
Vessels that were well known to all goldsmiths at that time and theirs
had to boast of particular applause. One was round and
richly decorated with a leaf border, with mythical animals and others
Oddities that remained inherent in Verrocchio's decorative style
are; the second showed a putti dance, one especially since Donatello
popular motif that we can still find in the master's drawings
will deal with.

From the agraffes that the artist made for the choir skirts of the Florentine
Cathedral chapter likes a bronze plaque of the Berliner
Give museums a reasonably clear idea (Fig. 2). they
points to the ornate throne, the adjoining barriers
Peaceful like a courtyard, the Madonna is adored and assisted by angels
of St. Lawrence and St. Sebastian. The
vanishingly shallow relief proves that we only have the sample cast
have a chased plate in front of us, intended for the application of enamel. The
Scheme of composition, types and proportions are Verrocchio
peculiar, as is the richness of the folds. The pious one
The object and the round shape evoke spiritual ornamentation.
In the later service of the pompous Medici, the master becomes his
Art also came to be equipped. The silver doe that
Lorenzo 1474 on the occasion of the tournament celebrated by Polizian
in honor of the Simonetta Vespucci wore on her helmet is a work
Verrocchios been.

[Illustration: Fig. 11. + Lavabo. + Marble. Florence, San Lorenzo, old
Sacristy.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

The only surviving work of this activity, the silver relief for the
Johannis altar of the baptistery, only reminds of its material
the goldsmithing, and falls in such a late period that it is not here
may be anticipated.

What other work has been handed down from his youth shows him
Masters in other ways. Unfortunately a lot is lost here too,
including that project that, as the first, is definitely to be dated
Verrocchio's work is of particular importance for the clear insight into
his development and for his early acquired versatility
artistic knowledge would have been.

One of the decorations of the cathedral in Orvieto was a miraculous one
Image of the Madonna, painted according to the legend by St. Luke himself.
Surrounded by the dim light of the candles, almost overwhelmed by the abundance
of the Christmas gifts, it stood near the front door under an in
modestly shaped tabernacle. The legacy of far from the
Home of living bishop of Ascoli, Francesco Monaldeschi, gave in 1461
the chiefs of the cathedral construction works to Florence and Siena
Writing drawings for the construction of a chapel. Except for Desiderio there
Settignano and Giuliano da Majano also provided a certain Andrea
Michaelis a draft. This Andrea is undoubtedly identical
with Andrea del Verrocchio, son of Michele di Cione. With his
He penetrated work as little as the two older masters.
A few years later, the order fell to the cathedral builder Giovanni di
Meuccio, whose work has since perished again.

The loss of this draft is all the more to be lamented than we are too
do not have the slightest hint of a reconstruction. Once only
Verrocchio was still active in architecture, but not as a
Space artist, rather as a designer and mechanic.

Brunelleschi's cathedral dome, a work of which the master boasted
it leaves behind even the models of the ancients in grandeur
himself, had been completed in Verrocchio's year of birth. As a
She seemed to be in her bell of security and protection
tremendous tension arching over the whole city. The one at death
the master's still missing crowning with the lantern had his
Successor in respectful retention of the original design
added. On April 23, 1467, the keystone of the graceful
Renaissance forms held lantern are blessed and the construction
thus count as completed. Only the conclusion of the whole was still pending:
the button (~ bottone ~) and the ball (~ palla ~) as the carrier of the crowning
Cross. For making the smaller one to be cast in bronze
Bottone turned the building authority to Giovanni di Bartolo,
who in collaboration with the goldsmith Bartolommeo Fruosino the casting
Executed in 1467. Verrocchio was one of the experts who carried out the
Had to estimate the level of confidence in his work
technical knowledge was.

The ball resting on the button was of a much larger scale
more difficult demands on the designer. Already about the type of
The manufacturing broke out of controversy. But penetrated into one
The conference was attended in large numbers by those who would like to run in
Cast bronze, no chased copper work advocated (January 1467).
Verrocchio agreed with them. The negotiations were still hesitant
until Verrocchio himself received the commission on September 10, 1468.

It's very educational even with this mechanical edition too
watch Verrocchio experiment technically. He who at the time
who had stood up for the casting is converted when it was sent to the
Execution goes to hammering. Eight copper plates are over
spherical stones hammered, soldered with silver and
finally gilded in fire. Vasari praises the resourcefulness in the
Installation of the inner passage that led through the cavity, and
the anchoring. At the end of May 1471, the 300 bushels of grain could hold
Ball to be wound up, and on June 1st the cross was whose
Poor valuable relics preserved, let in. Except for the facade
the cathedral was now complete. A writable grocer, Luca
Landucci, whose diaries have survived, tells of the festival
that the population made. The city trumpeters blared off
the clergy and many people went up and
upstairs began a long resounding Te Deum.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze. Florence,
Courtyard of the Palazzo Vecchio.

(The list does not come from Verrocchio.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 13. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze. Florence,
Courtyard of the Palazzo Vecchio.

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Among the frequent elementary hardships to which the cathedral was exposed,
has had nothing more devastating on Verrocchio's work than lightning, the
struck the lantern on the night of January 27, 1600. Up to the via
de 'Servi flew the marble rubble, and everyone screamed ~ misericordia ~.
The Grand Duke Ferdinand I left what was destroyed exactly like the old one
Restore the pattern, the cross and ball were re-gilded and two
Lead cases with documents from Pope Clement VIII and the Grand Duke
admitted, in which the violence of the storm was conjured up.




V.


In January 1496, a few months after the Medici were driven out, it was enough
the surviving brother Verrocchios, + Tommaso +, with the administrators of the
Medicinal Property a list of artistic works that
Andrea had executed on behalf of the family. Maybe stood
still payback items from the poor cloth weaver now
wanted to collect. This list, which is originally in the archive of
Uffizi Gallery, counts fifteen works that are down to a few
and shows how close Verrocchio's connection is with
of the art-loving family.

[Illustration: Fig. 14. + The putto with the dolphin. + Bronze.

Florence, courtyard of the Palazzo vecchio.]

When Cosimo the old man died in 1464, one appears for the first time as Verrocchio
To have made use of the artistic hand. The Signory, the one
pompous tomb with honorary statue considered, could not come to a conclusion
make, and so it stayed with the simple tombstone they
Family in front of the main altar of San Lorenzo above the underground
Had the crypt lowered into the floor. Design and execution stem from
Verrocchio her (Fig. 3). The stone consists of a square
Plate with a geometric pattern, executed in colored marble,
having. Every Christian sign or symbol is absent. The drawing
is simple: a circle is inscribed in the square frame,
which in turn includes two intersecting ellipses; the corners
fill coats of arms with the balls of the Medici. The charm of it all resides in
the colourfulness created by different types of stones and by their use
the bronze is obtained for the heraldic shields. We will still attend
other works see how much Verrocchio the colored incrustation,
especially preferred the connection of bronze with colored stone and
used them where he can with fine taste. The vertical
Arms of an ellipse contained on trapezoidal marble slabs
in bronze letters the inscription, which is the only glory of the
Deceased the publicly granted honorary name of the pater
patriae ~ contains. Of the indignant crowd is this one too
Gravestone was played badly despite its simplicity (1494),
and the family had to be rehabilitated, the horrors of the
To wipe out the devastation and restore it.

We have for this decorative work on the date of the Medicean's death
a chronological clue, it must have stylistic features
if we look at one of Verrocchio's most famous works, the
contrary to general assumption, also in this early period of the
set artistic maturity. It is the bronze statue of
young David, which is kept in the National Museum in Florence
(Fig. 4).

Vasari's narrative is particularly confused in this regard; he let
Verrocchio the statue after the legendary Roman stay
make and while the work the master still the Madonna in the
Chisel the bezel of the Bruni grave, facts that are not only incorrect
are, but are mutually exclusive. The cursory interpretation of a
The latest date of the document published by Gaye is 1476
want to establish the consummation of David; yet there are documents in that
only talking about the purchase price for which the figure is owned by the
Medici passed into the hands of the Florentine Signory. Probably have
Lorenzo and Giuliano had reason to leave the Signory
Statue to please. She rose up until the seventeenth century
the landing in front of the ~ Sala dell 'orologio ~. The place wasn't
chosen without intention. The heroic boy kept his arms drawn
Swords a door, called la catena, by which a bailiff
constantly kept watch, only to the orders of the respective
Head of administration to open or close.

David as a youthful liberator of the people was not just a hero after that
Heart of every honest republican, especially a figure
how it could not have been more convenient for an artist at the time.
But saw the early Renaissance with its enthusiasm for everything
still in the process of development, for everything supple and
Maturing in the form of a boy who is just growing up to be a youth
wants, one of her most distinguished artistic ideals.

Naked, with bowed head, foot on the giant's uneven head,
the broad tartsche in his right hand, that's how Donatello's David had stood since
Cosimo's exile in the courtyard of the government palace; a figure of strict
closed outline, full of a melancholy beauty about which
beyond the impetus and passion of that great artist
never been able to resolve. If you hold Verrocchio's figure next to it, so
there is a huge difference in design, execution and mood
surprising in the eyes.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. + The boy with the trumpet. + Thon.

Paris, collection of Mr. Gustave Dreyfuss.]

"And David was a brownish and handsome boy," says the Bible. So
he seems to have lived in Verrocchio's imagination. in the
Otherwise the master did not stick to tradition: every hint
the slingshot is missing, and the giant sword has become a humble one
Weapon that has become suitable for the boy's hand. Cheeky, sure, easy
glowed by the fire of his first triumph, the boy looks
smiling to himself; the sinewy right hand still holds the sword tight
Grip, the left is supported in the feeling of happy self-confidence
slightly on the hip. A tight leather roll surrounds the body,
Leather gaiters protect the calf and foot down to the toe. All edges of the
Garments are ornamented; a palmette adorns the breast,
Rosettes show the location of the nipples in a meticulous anatomy.
Between the feet lies the desolate head of the slain giant,
the one with his tangled hair and the coarse forms the heavily soldered one
Philistine betrays. Sitting in the gaping wound in the middle of the forehead
formerly the stone was still fixed.

[Illustration: Fig. 16. + bust of Giuliano de 'Medici. + Burned
Clay.

Paris, collection of Mr. Gustave Dreyfuss.]

The figure, although mostly clothed, is intended entirely as a nude
and felt. The muscles and the bone structure stand out
strictest through the leather of the panache. Everything is stretched, slim,
delicate, supple, especially hands and feet with the strong-boned
Limbs, the splayed and curved fingers, the protruding
second toe and the long foremost phalanx of the thumb. With strong, yes
disturbing accents are the peculiarities of nature in the stage of
Emphasis on development. The sinewy of the arms seems exaggerated
the veins that are still swollen from the tension of the forces,
exaggerated the angular protruding elbows, especially on the left
Poor. Here we see a thoroughly youthful artist in whom the
Reverence for nature still wins over the need for beauty
carries away.

In the head leaning forward a little, the one with its full curls
over the narrow, sinewy neck and over the slender, almost
lean body unfolds like a beautiful-leaved flower is that
The conflict between the artistic idea and the model is resolved (Fig.
5). Here, too, everything is delicate and fine, the bones narrow, the
Firm and definite outline, flat relief. The ones circling the face
Curls, divided into groups with the highest art, wide and lush in the
Neck resting, show the taste and the neatly detailing
Hand of the goldsmith. But the sensitive artist reveals how
nothing else in this figure a magical smile that the fine
Shapes shimmered and with the highlights and reflections of the
Metal lights up. It nests in the sharply withdrawn
Corners of the mouth, evens out the hardness and easily gets lost in it
blurred look that dreams into a happy distance.
Before Verrocchio, nobody dared to smile like that, and that
it has become a living, scurrying to and fro, not a frozen one
is, testifies to the high mastery of the young artist. This
Lionardo inherited a smile and transfigured it into that ~ dolcezza ~ who
irresistible.

[Illustration: Fig. 17. + bust of Lorenzo de 'Medici. + Burned
Clay.

Boston, United States, collection of Mr. Quincy Shaw.]

But not just the animation of expression through painting
A treatment based on the effects of light and reflections is new
and strange; also means the spatial conception of the figure
a huge step forward beyond what has already been achieved.
A clear spatial image that corresponds to the artistic idea is created
only gained if you choose the pure front view (Fig. 6). The
Motif of the raised, boldly turned left shoulder with the
the arm that is supported then speaks itself with haunting clarity
out. The fine overlaps and foreshortenings, especially on the
right side, assert yourself; the counterplay in the attitude of the
both sides of the body begins to work. One admires the safe
Feeling that the cardinal points of standing and movement are clear
highlights, e.g. B. by the formerly gilded ornaments on the neck
and at the armpit of the pan and through the webbing. The angular
The left arm jumping out of the richly moved outline finds its way through
the lowered sword in his right hand his counterweight. Always new
Subtleties that honor both talent and insight of the master
make, reveal themselves. By turning the left shoulder forward
the figure moves more freely and freely in space. she has a
rich profile view with nicely moving topline, it really is
Thought freely as a three-dimensional figure, not as a niche figure like Donatello's
David. She strives from every background and demands quite a lot
free space around you. Therefore she was in front of the pillar next to the
Catena not well positioned. Verrocchio certainly had the figure
for the interior of the courtyard in the Palazzo Medici on Via Larga or for the
Garden of one of the Medicean villas.

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Verrocchio's workshop. + Portrait bust of one
Youth +

Burnt clay. London, South Kensington Museum.]

The pedestal that is still in place
teaches important facts (Fig. 7). The square base made of
Gray-green Florentine sandstone bears a slightly tapered finish
red porphyry column. So the figure stood at a height of about
150 ~ cm ~. Furthermore, this basis again proves what
compositionally it is already a necessity, namely that the head
of the killed giant between the boy's feet, and not how
was previously believed to lie sideways under the drawn sword.
Finally we see Verrocchio's preference again from this list
for colored effects: the darkly patinated one with gold-plated ornaments
shimmering and sparkling bronze over the red stone of the pedestal.

It is not just a few who teach that we have youth work ahead of us
Defects pointed out are most clearly taught by freshness
considers the diligence in working through and the bubbly
Wealth in the details. Note z. B. Carefully if
also misunderstood, ornament on the hem that is based on Arabic letters
the panic. For grace and charm, the figure points back
Ghibertian figures, for example on the curly Esau, the figure on the back
with the two dogs, in one of the reliefs of the door of paradise. The
excellent anatomical knowledge, the precise and concise kind
the design suggest relationships with Antonio del Pollajuolo.
Pollajuolo, a few years younger than Verrocchio, enjoyed the fame,
to be the best connoisseur of the naked and become his drawings
undoubtedly had a shaping effect on Verrocchio's conception of form.

[Illustration: Fig. 19. + Female portrait bust. + Marble. Florence,
Museo Nazionale.

(After an original photograph by Gebr. Alinari in Florence.)]

It does not matter, however, from which models this young force matured
is, autocratic and full of strong individuality, she steps with her
first great works. Also as a technical achievement can hardly
More perfect things can be found than this pure, seamless out of form
Flowing, lovingly chiselled bronze cast.

The motif, as happily invented as it is, is naturally so casual
appears, has found strikingly little imitation. One in the
the excessively stretched proportions and the stupid expression little
attractive clay statuette of the Berlin museum can only be used as an imitation,
should not be regarded as a study of the nude to the original Verrocchio.
Two terracotta statuettes in the South Kensington Museum, London (No.
7602 and 7402), which were apparently made in Florence around 1490,
one belonging to the Robbia workshop in the Berlin Museum (No. 125) and
similar figurines in other places show an interesting crossing
Donatellesque and Verrocchiesque motifs.

"Brown light and beautiful", as Verrocchio designed it, is the David
no later master succeeded. Michelangelo made the
Shepherd boy made the giant who, on brave watch, the enemy
in mind, a self-confession of the threatened Republican appears.
Perhaps the Verrocchio boy's smile is no less one
Self-confession of the young master who succeeded in the first throw, this
innocent, cocky smile, with which even young Roland once before Mr.
Milon's aging strength kicked in:

  For God, Father, I am not angry
  That I slew the big wretch
  Meanwhile you were sleeping.




VI.


Cosimo's son, Piero, nicknamed the Gouty Man, sank
quickly to the grave in order to be able to develop what the father initiated. He
left these duties of honor to his sons Lorenzo and Giuliano.
At first they consented to the feelings of filial piety by
Verrocchio commissioned the father in the sacristy of San Lorenzo
To erect tomb. At the same time, the bones of the already
Uncle Giovanni, who died in 1461, was a favorite son of the old man
Cosimo to be buried.

What Verrocchio has achieved is his authoritative work
decorative style has always been recognized and celebrated, already by
his contemporaries who, after completion (1472), took care of the tomb
urged, “as if they had been turned away, to a new wonder of the world
look "(Fig. 8).

Completely independent of the structure and shapes of the Florentine
Niche grave, as designed by Bernardo Rossellino and Desiderio,
Verrocchio found a new and peculiar solution. The desire
the orderer, the cause had a modest outward form
the usual pompous laying out with the portrait statue of the dead
preferable will have shown him the way. So he only has one big one
heavy grave tray placed under an arched opening, originally
the sacristy with the sacrament chapel and which he connected through a
large-meshed knitting barred.

The architectural construction with its beautiful proportions and
The maturity of the profile leaves the pure and noble profile in all its strength
Admire master builder skills. The overall impression is reminiscent
in its strength and simplicity to antiquity; so like among theirs
Arkosolien the heavy sarcophagi of the Scipions and the Roman ones
Emperor had been set up. But the master of the early Renaissance
avoids the gloomy seriousness of the old and takes through the colors and
the playing richness of the ornament of the carried basic mood that
Heavy and the oppressive.

The white marble base resting on turtles shows in the
upper plate that already known from the tombstone of old Cosimo
colored incrustation. In the sarcophagus there is red porphyry, dark green
and white marble with the restless sheen of bronze in coloristic
processed in a highly effective way. And in the reveal of the arch
the white marble strip with the rich ornament rises in between
Profiles made of gray-green Macigno up to the final rosette.

The ornament connects antique decorative forms in a tasteful peculiarity
with naturalistic plant motifs. At Donatellos more antique
Verrocchio did not train himself in decoration. Rather, he takes action
back to Ghiberti's principles and joins in, should be a role model
be made well-known in a free, masterly manner
Desiderio, whose Marzuppini grave he must have studied carefully.
But his masculine seriousness grasps and shapes nature differently than that of
a hand of Desiderios guided by a feminine-tender feeling. Against the
the soft curves of the Marzuppini grave make the Medicimonument look angular
and curly, at the same time full of character and less playful. Even if the
Differences in material there the softer, here the more energetic
Treatment required, in the end, as everywhere, the temperaments
which express themselves in instructive diversity.

[Illustration: Fig. 20. Leonardo da Vinci. + Half-length portrait of a boy
Girl. +

Vienna, collection of Prince Lichtenstein.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

The relief is well carved out, like Vettorio Ghiberti
on the framing of Andrea's Baptistery door completed in 1464
Pisano did it, but without the harshness and sharpness that is noticeable there.
Ornaments and tendrils do not overlap the whole, as with Desiderio
architectural body, so that smooth surfaces give the eye peace
and on the way of contrast the lively play of ornamentation
increase (Fig. 9). So carefully consider the individual in context
appears with the whole, so little do we get the impression of one
clever invention, a scrambling of charming details.
The invention flowed richly and calmly, contained by that wise man
Moderation, in which the artistic maturity is determined.

[Illustration: Fig. 21. Leonardo da Vinci (?). + P. Scipio. +
Marble relief.

Formerly with Mr. Rattier in Paris.]

The rendering of the flowers, the fruits, the leaves is so individual,
that one is interested in the possibility of such a thorough study of nature
doubt and want to give space to the thought that Verrocchio was here
sculpted directly above nature. Should it be in the molding of individual
Parts of the human and animal body are special
Have had skill. With symbolic reference to the
Medici enters the famous, pointed diamond, the
Family gem, on. He crowns the top of the sarcophagus; in a
Set in a ring, it is graceful through the stick of leaves in the arch
looped, it also jumps out of the closing rosette.
When the braided bronze knitting is especially on the cover of the
Sarcophagus has been criticized as a naturalistic impossibility, so
one overlooked the artistic necessity, a motif that is the whole
The background dominates, already hinting at in the main part of the composition
anticipate (Fig. 10).

The wealth of Verrocchio's imagination can be seen in this
Recognize the decor of the two vases in the marble arched reveal
which festoons unfolded beautifully with alternating repetition of one
palm-like container and a tuft of laurel with curly leaves
climb up. The vase on the right is decorated with a turkey dance, at
especially the movement of what is seen from the back around the corner
flying angel boy is true and graceful. The vase on the left is
richer with ornament, her figurative ornament is limited
on angel heads with garlands hanging between them. Because both
Vases are placed over a corner, they deepen the rather shallow valley
of the arch and help reinforce the illusion of space.

As with the tombstone of old Cosimo, everyone is missing from this monument
Reference to the Christian worldview: certainly a meaningful one
Marks for the time.

With the exception of the one later inserted into the arch opening
Board shed, the large-meshed knitted network, the one
A view of the adjoining sacrament chapel should allow everyone
Brings an effect and prevents the back view of the sarcophagus is
the work remained free from any distortion.

Little did the donors suspect that they were also having their own tomb
buildings. Both Giuliano and Lorenzo have next to their father and uncle
found their resting place in the same spacious porphyry chest until 1559,
when Grand Duke Cosimo I moved their corpses into the new sacristy
where their coffins were recently placed under the Madonna of the
Michelangelo found it.

As completely new as this solution of the niche grave must be explained, so
she did not attend much school. Just once more, at the tomb of Neri
di Gino Capponi in fabric. Spirito, the motif of the barred occurs
Arch niche on. Certainly based on Verrocchios
Idol; because if the one buried there died in 1457 and
the sarcophagus, in the forms of the Donatello school, older than
Verrocchio's monument, the latticework can only be built after the
Transfer of the tomb from the old church to the new building
not before 1481, the year when in the new church
the first mass was read. -

[Illustration: Fig. 22. + Saint Jerome. + Statuette. Burned
Clay.

London, South Kensington Museum.]

[Illustration: Fig. 23. + Mary with the child. + Burnt clay.
Florence, Uffizi Gallery.

(Formerly in S. Maria Nuova.)

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Looking back, it is not easy to find the path from the Medicigrabe
artistically just a few steps away, but hidden in one
Washbasin set up in the side room leads (Fig. 11). The one about the work
The literary testimonies received tend to confuse the question of the
Author than to clarify it. The oldest source writes the lavabo
Rossellino to, Vasari describes it as a joint work of
Donatello and Verrocchio. For the time of creation we get through
the noble falcon with the diamond rings and
the banner, the personal impresa of Pieros des gout-frail,
an exact clue; it must be during his lifetime and on his behalf
be executed, i.e. no later than 1469.

[Illustration: Fig. 24. + Maria with the child. + Marble. Florence,
Museo Nazionale.]

The boldness of the structure, which already touches on the baroque
eminently painterly throw of the composition, the interesting change
proudly curved curves, the strongest reliefs and the most delicate
Surface decoration speak of a builder and decorator first
Rank, which in instantaneous, strong effect the creator of the
Medicigrabes even seems superior. But not only in the individual
Shapes, the lion's head, the winged female dragons, the
Carrying the pelvis, the tooth cut exactly on the lid of the porphyry drawer
is so educated, the same artist reveals himself here as there,
We also recognize an essential element in the polychromy of the washbasin
Verrocchio's decorative principle again. But the execution is in
both works different. In the washbasin, which is also partially
is damaged, has a more fleeting hand, but with a masterful one
sure understanding of the shapes, the chisel guided. Not that everywhere
same because it makes a divergence between the pedantic
Execution of the wall filling and the lively, even stormy swing
of the free-standing parts apply. And maybe the argument is the
Sources best with what the artwork says about itself
to settle that Rossellino and Verrocchio in the effective
Wells have been involved together, with one the wall, the
the basin and the vase fell to others.

Be that as it may, the washbasin counts among the spiritual and
most imaginative decorative pieces representing the Florentine Quattrocento
has to show at all. All later achievements appear poor
and sober against the wealth and verve that these forms lead to
has attached a whole.

[Illustration: from b. 25. Kind of Verrocchio. + Mary with the child. +
Glazed clay.

Florence, Sacristy by S. Croce.]

Two other decorative works by Verrocchio can no longer be seen
prove. The bronze candelabra for which Andrea paid in 1469
and which the Signory had ordered for her audience hall,
has been searched for in vain among those still preserved in the Bargello.
Presumably it was a replica of an antique bronze chandelier.

[Illustration: Fig. 26. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the
Children. + Colored stucco.

Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

[Illustration: Fig. 27. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the
Children. + Burnt clay.

London, South Kensington Museum.]

In October 1474 Verrocchio poured a famous one, with figures and
Ornaments decorated big bell for the monks in Vallombrosan
Monte Scalari. After the abolition of the monastery (1775) the bell came
in the possession of the parish priest of San Pancrazio in Val d'Arno, burst in 1815
in two and was poured over by an unsuspecting hand.




VII.


The heavy ashlar of the Palazzo vecchio opens up on you
Columned courtyard, in the middle of which a fountain with a quiet
Fall lets its waters play. After the glaring sunshine and that
noisy hustle and bustle in the liveliest square in town
There is twilight and silence here. The air blows like a grotto
the darkness of the vaulted hallway, and that falls over the high walls
Dimmed light like in a shaft. Hit its brightest rays
the winged boy with the wriggling fish in his arms, who
like a fleeting bird resting gracefully for a moment over the
Water art seems to linger (Fig. 12).

The older art judges vote in praise of this work by Verrocchio
with the newer and newest without reservation. “Nothing can
Be more cheerful and lively, says Rumohr in his Italian
Research “, as the expression of the faces and the movement of this
Child; and nowhere among the modern ore casts one meets one
such a beautiful treatment of the fabric, such an exemplary style. Bey
deceptive appearance of half-flying, half-running movement, rests
nevertheless the group, which has been invited many times, is clearly in theirs
Focal points; after a happy feeling, the artist gave the child
plump fullness, the fish and the wings (the mostly unloaded
Parts) a certain angular sharpness. "

With this putto Verrocchio has one way beyond the limits
Quattrocentist form development that has flourished
created to tie in with the baroque, even the rococo
not missed.

In Donatello the real creator of the genre is celebrated,
those child figures who have a strange middle between the erots
of antiquity and the angels of the Christian worldview.
Donatello uses them with noticeable preference and makes use of them
their like decorative elements. But he cares about their education
only the organic connection between the parts of the body, not the structure
the single form. There is something summary in his approach to the
Towards nature. Suitable for comparison with Verrocchio's fountain putto
Donatello's Cupid in the Bargello, smiling over the trampled on
Snakes prances. He appears to be less buxom in his body structure
but almost clumsy next to the fish man. Even with the bow and
the arrow placed on it, which compels the position of the hands to complete,
it is more bound in outline and moved far less freely in space. in the
Head completely reveals Donatello's antique style, from which
Verrocchio's antiqueization (see p. 49 below) differs significantly.

Luca della Robbia also has the child figure with a strong character
Based on ancient models for one of his favorite depictions
made, but offers itself among them, since they have all remained reliefs
are not worthwhile comparisons.

In contrast, the Christ Child points to Desiderios tabernacle in S. Lorenzo
already on Verrocchio. This blessing boy is already showing the plump
Forms the fat pads on the joints that are deeply incised
Skin folds. But with Desiderio the astonishing prevails
Shape security the individual inspiration. The grace works a little
indifferent, and an almost soulless refinement speaks from the ans
Academic grazing smoothness and coolness.

Verrocchio, however, gives a far with the same mastery of form
more original naturalness. Like no one before him, he has LB
Let Alberti's warning be concerned: “The artist also note that
our limbs in childhood round, turned, and cozy
for the touch. ”Verrocchio's putto is quite a boy, while
Desiderio represents the child in a more sexless sense. Verrocchio
has different proportions, a strong, stocky build
stronger relief. Its forms appear to be more solid, more individual
Smile fresher, his eyes more mischievous.

[Illustration: Fig. 28. Francesco di Simone. + Mary with the child. +

Marble. Florence, Museo Nazionale.]

And yet with this figure the joy in the details is definitely evident
before the delight of the whole thing. Here the motive is everything. With
the lines extending freely and boldly into space on all sides
the spatial illusion already observed with David is increased.
Impossible to look at this putto other than at the center of one
architectural system, accessible from all sides
to think. And what contrast between the views of the fore
and the back (Fig. 13 and 14). How is the one between the rough
gripping children's fists, writhing fish skillfully in motion
arranged in the figure by its broad, goggle-eyed skull, above
covering the left wing, alternation in the symmetry of the
Bringing lines, its curved tail bridges the gap between the right
splayed lines of the other wing and leg fills. In the
From the front the boy appears almost naked, from the rear
with the shirt fluttering in rich bulging folds an enlivenment of the
Striving for surfaces and shapes.

[Illustration: Fig. 29. Verrocchio's workshop. + Maria with the child
and an angel. + marble. Boston (United States), collection of Mr.
Quincy Shaw.]

The counterplay of the, felt down to the painterly subtleties
different substances would have a stronger effect without the fatal one
Cleansing the figure at the beginning of the nineteenth century
had to put up with. Now the new patina has set unevenly,
and where they appear in a mussel formation that is not seldom observed
not only the clarity of the form, but also the
Uniformity of the overall impression sensitively damaged.

In his handwritten memorandum, Tommaso Verrocchio mentions
the bronze putto was intended for the villa in Careggi. He
will have stood there in the yard or in the garden, and we have good ones
Reason, the three bronze heads and four listed immediately behind
Snapdragons made of marble with the fountain as ornament and gargoyles
to bring in connection. That would then result in a polychrome
Effect as Verrocchio loved her. However, no more precise information can be given
determine, because the figure came at the instigation of Grand Duke Cosimo
between 1550 and 1568 to Florence in the courtyard of the Palazzo vecchio,
where she ousted Donatello's David. The beautifully rounded porphyry bowl
with the marble baluster and the three-tier pedestal stirs out
the sixteenth century by the sculptor Tadda. Possible,
that in the head of the baluster three of those four are marble
Reused lion heads; at least they show Verrocchieske
Forms and are clearly embedded. Has a fine sense of style
Tadda in the composition of the architectural parts the character
the early Renaissance. The water is also with it
Restraint used as was customary in the Quattrocento. With
large rushing masses that stimulate the ear and the shape is silvery
disguise, the early Renaissance does not work. On the petite and
Her striving is pleasing, and to this corresponds the thin,
iridescent jet of water, its rippling fall just loud enough
is to make the dreamy silence perceptible all around. And this
The memory leads silence back to the cypress garden of the villa
to Careggi, where Lorenzo enjoys being with his philosophical friends
Talk lingered, and where the fountain with the fish man over all
learned disputations away into the scent of roses and the cool evening
chatted ...

[Illustration: Fig. 30. Mino da Fiesole. + Tomb of Cardinal Niccolo
Forteguerri. + Marble. Rome, San Clemente.]

Another putto is thought of in the older sources. He stopped
a hammer in the movable arms and struck the hours with it
on the clock on the Mercato nuovo. Such mechanical feats
enjoyed great popularity. Dello Delli had a similar one
Figure worked for the tower of the town house in Siena. The biggest
But Lorenzo della Volpaia enjoyed fame in this technique, from it
Workshop of the famous clock in the Sala del Oriuolo named after her
came from the Florentine town hall. Has received up to our days
just one example of this kind: the hammer-hammering men
the clock tower in Venice. You give in, at least to the mechanics, one
Presentation of the "beautiful and imaginative work" Verrocchio.

[Illustration: Fig. 31. + Sketch for the tomb of Cardinal Niccolo
Forteguerri. +

Burnt clay. London, South Kensington Museum.]

The unfortunately modern painted clay statuette of a naked,
wingless boy, owned by Mr. G. Dreyfuss in Paris
the motif of the fountain putto again in a slight variation
(Fig. 15). Standing on a hemisphere, in rapid motion, seems
the little one having held a trumpet in the raised right hand, in
which he blows with full cheeks. A look at similar tubebasers
Donatello's putti in Siena or Padua not only shows the distance
of the two masters from each other, but corroborates again on one
particularly illuminating example of the impossibility of Verrocchio in a
Bringing a school relationship with Donatello.

[Illustration: Fig. 32. + Tomb of Cardinal Niccolo Forteguerri. +
Pistoia, San Jacopo Cathedral.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Each of the ~ alcuni putti bellissimi ~ mentioned by Vasari is
Track has been lost. Perhaps replicas of it are in the
large-headed, half with legs slightly crossed
erect lying naked children, two of whom received the
Berlin Museum owns. Verrocchio's hand himself will not become anyone
recognize in them that they are important to the school. Self
Albrecht Dürer did not disdain this Verrocchiesken putto without it
Circumstances for the Christ Child on the Madonna with the Pear (Vienna) too
use. And the plump, chubby angels of
Baroque and still rococo descendants of those putti
Verrocchios that in the heat of the art market the centuries and the
Nationalities sometimes get confused.

[Illustration: Fig. 33. Lorenzetti. + Portrait statue of the cardinal
Niccolo Forteguerri. +

Marble. Pistoia, Liceo Forteguerri.]




VIII.


The pair of brothers in whose service Verrocchio the versatility of his
Talent has to be tried out most often, is divided into two excellent ones
Clay busts passed to posterity from the hand of the master. These
Busts, unfortunately in two private collections of public attention
removed mean all the more that they mean men in theirs
the most powerful and happiest years of life.

The temperaments contrasted as strongly as the characters. In
Lorenzo, the older brother (born 1449), lived the somewhat melancholy life
and the father's not quite healthy blood, in Giuliano (b.
1453) the strength and joy of life of the grandfather. Both
as lucky heirs found a rich family estate, over
which they disposed of with the generosity that they dispose of in abundance
Born probably pending. The thirst for fame of the century blazed in
both equally high and bright. The power and prestige of the house too
increase was her only thought. But with Lorenzo, the melancholy one
Temperaments from a young age to smaller and larger
Leiden was ailing, the ambition was directed more towards the training of the
Mind and spirit, Giuliano, the sanguine, vied with
equals in the practice and mastery of all physical
Powers and abilities, in the refinement of the external appearance. The
Ideal of the fully developed Renaissance, the perfect Hofmann, the
Cortegiano, answers, but in these two personalities
split, already on.

[Illustration: Fig. 34. Lorenzo di Credi. + Flying Angel. + Study
to the Forteguerri tomb.

Silver pen drawing. London. British Museum.]

No wonder that Lorenzo has the finest and richest minds as well
to rally as Giuliano knew how to flourish in the noble world.
The festivities with which they were not sparse, the tournaments, the
they rode in honor of their ladies of the heart, were like poets by
Luca Pulci and Angelo Poliziano sung about. The Platonic Academy,
with Marsilio Ficino at the helm, liked to gather in one
of the villas of Lorenzo. Lorenzo himself was devoted to poetry,
and one of his melancholy, ingratiating verses, in which he is the
fleeting beauty of youth in the uncertainty of the morning
to enjoy the hour, is always quoted when the language
comes to the end of the early Renaissance. Lorenzo was one of those who made him
understood, adored, feared by those he ignored, so
Giuliano was everyone's favorite. Without a doubt he is then
been the most popular man in Florence. Hence the outrage flared
also all the brighter than in the murder attempt by Pazzi Giuliano, the
Flower of knighthood, his life under the daggers of the conspirators
had to leave. Like Caesar, he was barely twenty-five years old and laid out
in San Lorenzo with the twenty-one death wounds visible to all. The
entire youth in the city put on mourning clothes.

[Illustration: Fig. 35. Verrocchio's workshop. + Sitting angels with
the name of Christ. +

Marble. Berlin. Royal Museums.]

Not too long before that catastrophe, Giuliano becomes our master
sat by the bust, one of the ornaments of the Dreyfuss family
Collection at Paris forms (Fig. 16). With perfect certainty it is
Character hit, from the bold posture and turn of the head
to the left speaks enterprise and daring. Throw your eyes
a challenging look to the side and the full, strong lips
purses a streak of superiority and contempt for the everyday world. On
ironic smile sits in the dimples of the cheeks. Strength, pride and
Self-confidence lay on the broad face, the curls heavy
wreath. A marvel of armouring is the tank,
that covers the broad chest. The collar encloses a brazen one
Neck, the head of Medusa threatens from the chest. Here has again
the goldsmith had a fine hand in the game while in
the system of the whole and in the head the accurate characteristic
disclosed.

In Lorenzo's bust (with Mr. Shaw in Boston, fig. 17) the predominates
Expression of great willpower, the melancholy mood. The
Individual forms, forehead, nose and mouth are naturally more noble here
than with Giuliano. The soft cables in the system tighten and tighten
an energy that struggles to fight off physical suffering. In
the treatment is all big and simple. Under the neck
smoothly falling hair stands out for the beautifully rounded shape of the
Skull. A strange mixture of active and passive mental life
gives the portrait its high psychological appeal:

    The wild strength of young eyes
  Defiance of the mouth and harsh silence,
  A train of dream and passion ...

The less ornate armor is adorned by two on the chest
facing each other holding coat of arms dragons, which in similar formation
have already been observed at the washbasin, and two on the shoulder joints
Gorgon heads with the same furious scream as the Medusa
ejects from the tank of Giuliano.

Of all the busts of Lorenzo, this one is the most likable.
Later life experience and mental work made the moves hard, and
Illness drew deep furrows and furrows.

Verrocchio's creative power only becomes apparent when these are compared
related and yet so different personalities clearly and with
Admiration recognized. Also with regard to the complete similarity
let us trust Master without hesitation. If we a little
older-looking heads of the brothers on Bertoldo's medal, the
Lorenzo was struck in memory of the catastrophe of 1478 for
using the chronological fixation of our busts as an aid
we Verrocchio's work in the early seventies, back in time
of the Medicimonument.

Verrocchio will probably have removed the mask from the dead Giuliano,
since he was unequaled in this art. Shaping above nature
in which the master used a specially invented casting compound,
he used it especially in connection with the wax modeler Orsini.
Together they created life-size statues in which face and
Hands reshaped in wax over nature, the skeleton of wood
hid in clothes made of natural fabrics, the hair by one
Wig were replaced. So took in the need for truth in life
the early Renaissance the same slightly sloping path to the trivial,
which our panopticon art took out of the need for sensation,
with the serious difference, however, that at that time artists
were at work. More serious purposes were also pursued. Lorenzos
Friends and relatives left his costumed wax portrait
as a gift of dedication and thanksgiving for the happy salvation from
Set up a pazzi conspiracy. One of those wax figures came into the
Church of Blessed Chiarito, wearing the costume that Lorenzo had on the
Had laid paths to that fateful high mass; a second, with
dressed in the bourgeois Lucco, there was a third in the Annunziata
in S. Maria degli Angeli below Assisi.

[Illustration: Fig. 36. Francesco di Simone. + Tabernacle. + Marble.
Perugia. Chiesa di Monteluce.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Among the terracotta busts that are already wearing the costume after the end of the
Belonging to the early renaissance, one has recently in a previously
A young man's bust attributed to Antonio del Pollajuolo shows the portrait of
Lorenzo's son, Piero il fiero (born 1471) and want to recognize it
Verrocchio assigned. Albeit the identification of personality
it is valid, the provision on Verrocchio raises concerns. Of the
Head that considers itself more by freshness than by individual
The development of the details shows the style, but
not the characteristics of Verrocchio's own hand.

[Illustration: Fig. 37. + Entombment of Christ. + Thon. Berlin. Royal
Museums.]

[Illustration: Fig. 38. + The death of Francesca Tornabuoni. + Left
Half. Marble.

Florence. Museo nazionale.]

With other multiple busts of young men (in Berlin and
London) already leads the rough work on the thought of the
Workshop. In type closely related to one another with the
Parted hair in curls, his broad face
with the somewhat rigid eyes and the friendly, open expression,
all cut off below the shoulders and in baked clay
carried out, they were, as portraits of young relatives, the custom
according to the time, on the chimneys, over the doors and windows as
Room decorations (Fig. 18).

[Illustration: Fig. 39. + The death of Francesca Tornabuoni. + Rights
Half. Marble.

Florence. Museo nazionale.]

A similar series of busts made in the same material
older bearded men, all of whom were Verrocchio's type of Christ
is based on - in the collections of the Musée Cluny in Paris, formerly
at the painter Landsinger in Munich, in the South Kensington Museum in London,
in the courtyard of the Collegiata in San Gemignano - are considered studies
to those large silver statues of the apostles that Sixtus IV. supposedly
ordered from Verrocchio. So apocryphal, as I said, this one
Order appears together with the Roman stays derived from it,
so loose is the connection between this work and the workshop
of the artist. Among the students, Agnolo di Polo is considered special
skillfully praised in the execution of such clay work; meanwhile
offers the only work certified by him, a bust of Christ in the
Liceo Forteguerri to Pistoja, not enough clues to
one or the other of the busts mentioned is sure to come towards him
determine.

The depiction of feminine charms must be more in the Madonnas
Verrocchios are more sought after than among the few female busts that
has awarded him the recent criticism. If, however, the most beautiful
of all female portrait busts of the Quattrocento with Verrocchio in
Is connected, it only proves how high the
Artist is appreciated. This bust (Fig. 19) which is the National Museum
Preserved at Florence, comes from the Palazzo Medici, which is why in the
A member of that family has also been suspected
is. But so far all attempts to identify the person
failed. It is very peculiar and contrary to custom
the end of the bust with the very visible, loosely above the breast
folded arms. The head with the ringlets over the temples
and ears and the pigtails tucked into a silk cap whole
tilted gently to the right and back, the woman with the narrow,
long-fingered hands wrapped in the wide belt
Primrose bouquet in front of the breast. And from these wonderfully shaped hands
with the slim, pointed fingers speaks more soul and spirit,
than from the still embarrassed smile, that in the corners of the beautiful
Mouth sits. Who was able to form such hands? Certainly with your hands
David, with their graceful spread, are of the highest delicacy,
and if the stronger bone structure there the soft beauty here
has given way, this can to a certain extent quite well
with the diversity of personalities and material
be explained. But there lives a soulful one in these woman's hands
A grace that Verrocchio does not have in the most beautiful of his Madonnas
was able to express. Who Leonardo's hand studies, especially
that splendid drawing in Windsor Castle with one hand
our bust has a very similar position in front of its eyes, is also before
this bust, initially hesitant, rather to the student than
think of the master. Meanwhile the features in favor of Leonardo
soon multiply. The portrait of a girl in the Liechtenstein gallery too
Vienna offers very surprising analogies (Fig. 20). Not just in the
Outward appearances of the costume and the hairstyle, also in the conception of form
the same artist reveals himself in both: here as there the broad,
Flat layout of the face, the eyes set wide apart
with the heavily drooping lids that look tired
Giving veiled, the pure and sharply drawn mouth. And if
the latest Leonardo research is right by holding the hands of the
Windsor drawing as a study for the demonstrably cut off
of the Vienna portrait, the similarity extends
the bust with the portrait also on the hands. Quite Leonardesque
the bulging of the wrists, the flat folds with the
narrow ridges, which are essentially from Verrocchio's bulging folds
deviate is the uncommon and never lost in the petty
Care of details. If a girl's head looks out of the Vienna picture,
whose beauty, as the inscription on the back says, still through
Virtue is enhanced, so the marble bust smiles
Grace of the mature woman, especially in profile view
beautifully pronounces. So do we have, as was supposed, the same
Personality and, I add, by + the same artist + in front of us,
so certainly from different years of life.

In a second, far less individual marble bust (with Mr.
G. Dreyfuss in Paris) because of the coat of arms on the sleeve of the
Damask robe want to recognize a Colleoni and accordingly
the work of Verrocchio's last years in Venice
assigned. The emblem alone is only roughly correct
not to say not at all with the easily recognizable condottiere
the costume and hairstyle show the Florentine fashion around 1470,
and in the profile view the bust moves very close to those
which is not quite convincingly attributed to Desiderio da Settignano
become. A concise criticism is impossible here, since the bust is on the neck
broken and put together, also from too sharp cleaning
has suffered considerably. At the back of the head, on which the very artificial
Hairstyle with braided ribbons and flowers can be used
former care of the chisel can still be recognized. In her current one
State, the work may not make a higher claim than under the
Collective term to be cataloged Verrocchio.

There is also no female clay bust at Mr. Foulc's in Paris
perfectly received. It eludes my judgment in so far as
it only became known to me in one illustration. With individual
Enlivenment of the head, in which the very lively mouth is noticeable, seems
she gives me a good example of Verrocchio's conception of femininity
To deliver portraits that are conspicuously related to those of Desiderios
shows. The robe is unfortunately quite sober. -

[Illustration: Justice.]

[Illustration: Love.]

[Illustration: Faith.]

[Illustration: Hope.

Fig. 40-43. + Marble statuettes, belonging to the Tornabuoni grave. + Paris.
~ Mme. ~ Ed. André.]

Vasari still speaks of two bronze relief portraits, ideal portraits
Alexander d. Size and King Darius, Lorenzo, if not
as a gift giver, but as a middleman to the art-loving king
Matthias Corvinus sent to Hungary. The loss of this work
brings us important evidence of Verrocchio's relationship to
Antiquity. Surely the master grabbed the coins and for the guys
the cut stones with the images of those two rulers
back, who were in the Medicean palace, since the zeal for collecting
Cosimos and his son Piero dedicated themselves to this area of ​​ancient cabaret
had turned. Verrocchio, however, is completely free of his imagination
in the ornamentation of armor, the diversity of which is particularly famous
will be followed. Giuliano's breastplate was already on
Samples of fine taste and the cleanest armouring. For the
Loss of these works must at this point be a reference to the magnificent
Marble relief with the inscription ~ P · SCIPIONI · ~ help out since
Death of its last owner, Mr. Rattier, has nowhere in Paris
can be proven (Fig. 21). In the elegantly developed forms
with the restrained smile, the playful richness of the ornaments
(note the meandering lines of the ribbons), in the purity of the
The contour with a sharp profile can also be seen here on drawings
Leonardos reminded me, especially of the great warrior head of the
Malcolm Collection. Indeed, the boundary between teacher and
Student again so indeterminate that, regardless of the
lively support for Leonardo, not trusting the decisive
To step from one to the other, even less so than mine
Efforts to get to see the original were unsuccessful
are.

[Illustration: Fig. 44. Francesco di Simone. + Tomb of
Legal scholar Francesco Tartagni. + Marble. Bologna. San Domenico.]

Verrocchio also has the Medici as a restorer of ancient works of art
served. Among the many antique torsos that Cosimo the old made from
Rome had brought with them was a Marsyas, who of his time
Donatello added and at the door of the Medicipalast, which on Via
Ginori goes out, had been set up. Soon after was in Lorenzos
Hands fell a Marsya torso of red marble, the Verrocchio
had to supplement, and which make a counterpart to that first
should. The 1495 dissolution of the Medicean art treasures is
has also become fatal for these antiquities. True, they came after
Restoration of the family in 1513 apparently to their old ones
Place back where the traveling legal scholar Johann Fichard came from
Frankfurt a. M. saw in 1536, but then both tracks are lost
completely. The statues of Marsyas No. 155 and 156 in
first corridor of the Uffizi with those of Donatello and Verrocchio
supplemented identified. According to Fichard's description, that of
Verrocchio in all essential parts, with the exception of the head
completed torso shown sitting. Probably him
to this addition the same cameo from the possession of the Medici
necessary clues that Michelangelo gave in the interesting
Relief copied from his youth. Verrocchio processed with it
almost playful skill a piece of red marble, whose
white veins that faithfully mimicked tendons and nerves; and this
Certainly equally difficult and tasteless feats satisfied
the naturalistic sense of time to the highest. One was allowed in
fifteenth century still expect a little nerve!

[Illustration: Fig. 45. + The beheading of John the Baptist. +
Driven silver.

Florence. Museo dell 'Opera.]

This restoration offers the decent opportunity to develop the relationship
Verrocchios to set antiquity. He is completely on the ground in it
of most and the most outstanding of his contemporaries. With you
he shared the feeling of the artistic achievements of the present
could be seen with honors alongside those of the old world.
As a Florentine, he does not know enthusiasm without criticism. The Council
of LB Alberti is always present to him: the connection to the
Form formation in antiquity was said to be closed through independent study of nature
replace. He probably copied occasionally z. B. that candelabra for that
Audience room of the signers, of which it is expressly assured, he
was "modeled on a certain antique vessel". Also owned
Vasari in his Verrocchio collection a terracotta relief, one
Representing a horse's head after antiquity. A beautiful terracotta statuette
of seated Saint Jerome in the South Kensington Museum
London, where the master puts the robe on his lap
carefully studied, repeated the motif of the well-known ancient
Dornausziehers, which then circulated in many free copies
was (Fig. 22). Ancient mythical creatures: the female dragons who
Medusa heads, ancient decorative forms: the lion's foot, the turtles,
the cornucopia, the candelabra, antique ornament: the fruit wreath, that
The acanthus leaf, the palmette frieze and the rosette are used by Verrocchio
with preference, but they are always freely reproduced, spiritually animated,
peculiarly transformed. From all this speaks the artistic elation
of time, which is reflected in the reproduction of "nature" that is, innumerable,
lovingly observed and painstakingly reproduced details
Old already felt superior. Ugolino Verino's praise, the Verrocchio
to Phidias, at other times equated to Lysippus, would have
Our Master's self-esteem certainly not embarrassed.
And not just in front of the terrifying truth of life of the bloodthirsty
He likes the tortured with the justified pride of the self-confident
Artist asked: Who of the ancients ...?

[Illustration: Fig. 46. + Christ and the unbelieving Thomas. +

Bronze. Florence. Or San Michele. Donatello's marble tabernacle.]

Verrocchio prevented this developed artistic self-esteem
however by no means his artistry even on tasks of only
to put decorative meaning. The self-confident artist was still closing
not the dutiful guildsman. So he made twenty masks
after life as jewelry over the doors of the palace in Via
larga. Here, too, his already vaunted art is above nature
to have come to form. Presumably we have among these
Masks to think of portraits of the deceased, loved ones close to the family;
we learn from the Medici inventory that such portraits
were installed several times over the doors. Verrocchio also improved them
over the loggias of the courtyard and the arcades of the garden
antique heads.

After all, Verrocchio is also one of the great festival decorators.
For the two tournaments sung about by Pulci and Polizian, his
Messrs Lorenzo and Giuliano in honor of Lucrezia de 'Donati and the
Simonetta Vespucci rode in 1469 and 1475, Verrocchio designed the whole
magnificent elevator. When entering the barriers in the piazza
S. Croce were erected, pages wore the purple and white painted ones
Standard ahead. On this “Spiritello” was Lucrezia de 'Donati
painted in azure brocade dress embroidered with gold and silver; under
the sun shone out in a rainbow and cast a bright one
Shine on the figure holding a branch of laurel from a dry trunk
plucks and winds it into a wreath. In was emblazoned on the rainbow
Gold letters Lorenzo's motto: ~ le tems revient ~.

[Illustration: Fig. 47. + Christ and the unbelieving Thomas. + Bronze.
Florence. Or San Michele.]

Verrocchio's were even more glamorous and far more comprehensive
guided preparations for the reception of Duke Galeazzo Sforza,
who in March 1471 with his wife Bona of Savoy and one
Entourage of two thousand people made its entry into Florence.
The princely rulers stayed in the Medici palace. All
The family's riches were emblazoned in the rooms: above precious things
Flemish carpets hung on the furniture; ancient sculptures and modern
Paintings for which the art-loving Duke has a special understanding
showed, graced corners and walls. Venetian candlesticks sprayed
Candlelight, and in the great ballroom, where the tables are glorious
stood prepared, the silver crockery sparkled on the precious
Sideboard. Garlands entwined themselves on the wall and ceiling, bowls
face and smell delighted with oriental incense.
If in the often-cited memorandum of Tommaso also from
a "~ aparato ~" is spoken of, then the thought is of a
Festival performance is probably permitted, as is the case with Signory in three
Churches of the city organized in honor of the foreign guests.




IX.


The considerable group of depictions of the Madonna in marble and clay
and stucco, on which Verrocchio's name is attached, can be
can be traced back to an original work by the master. Until just before his
When it was transferred to the Uffizi, it was hidden in one
Hall leading to the gallery of the S. Maria Nuova hospital. In
strong high relief, which in certain parts pushes to the limit of the
It shows the Madonna up to her hips,
lovingly smiling down at the naked Christ child who was with
gesture of blessing on a splendid pillow in front of her on one
The parapet is in place (Fig. 23). The group is made of baked clay,
so that, as always before terracottas, the thought of a model for the
Bronze cast or marble finish comes to life. Can't do enough
be complained that we have no news of the origin of the work
have; the one mentioned by Vasari, from the Casa Medici
We must not recognize Madonna in ours because neither that
Material - there it was a marble relief - nor the description -
"The Christ Child on the mother's neck" - fits. The in all parts
equally accomplished and beautiful work provides sufficient information
Verrocchio's ideal of the Madonna.

The Quattrocento still had the hieratic tradition
related representation of the enthroned Madonna broken in favor
a more worldly, more humanly intimate view. The untouchable
appeared to the artists, stripped of their heavenly dignity, in all
Maternity and nurseries in the image of the woman who has recently given birth and the mother herself
to be present. And what about maternal care and maternal happiness
came before their eyes, formed their skillful hands in naive
Indifference to the lofty thought they should serve. Not in
the artists differed from what they saw, but in
as they saw it.

Donatello takes hold, passionate and stormy, as he feels
the tragic side of the subject. His Madonnas are the ancient ones
Related to heroines, seers, and sibyls; like that they have
looked deeply into the deceit of hearts and the suffering of the world; of the
Niobe's pain lives in hers, albeit dampened by resignation
large, almost rigid eyes. As if they knew how soon they would give it up
must, they clutch the child with dull passion,
wrap it in the wide folds of their veil and fear
it is more through her wild tenderness than that she is trusting it
did. Luca della Robbia emphasizes the Virgin in his Madonnas,
who plays with the child like a younger sibling. Your
A faint shadow of the impending future hardly clouds pure looks.
Everything graceful, dandy, girlish is to these young mothers
own. Their robes are plain and unadorned, while the
Show Donatello's rich pleating and modest decorations. The
Child, never as ugly as the more naturally educated des
Donatello, hugs his mother, in whose arms his laughing
and a shining children's paradise. At Donatello the
oppressive mood before the onset of the tragedy, with Luca the cheerful one
Jurisdiction of the idyll.

Verrocchio's Madonna, on the other hand, is a noble woman in happiness
young motherhood. Above the slightly wavy, with ribbons
With her braided hair she wears a neatly folded veil;
the cloak over the beautifully lined undergarment is supported by a large,
bead-set agraffe held together. With downcast eyes
and with a fine, reserved smile she looks at her beautiful
Child. This is a boy with a lovely curly head, chubby cheeks
and happy children's eyes. Not quite sure on his tight yet
Little legs, he grabs the shawl with his left hand as if to hold onto it
the mother, the right hand, easily supported by the mother, does the
Gesture of blessing. In this Madonna is the deep human
Sensation paired with the noblest decency. The upright proud
The mother's posture expresses the consciousness of representation;
at the same time the mother takes a step back from the child. In the child
again, much innate class consciousness is alive; his smile
is already touching the gracious. And yet the human freezes
nowhere in courtly etiquette. But the bourgeois sphere is in
this Madonna already overcome. In her nursery it is certainly like that
A distinguished visitor, like Ghirlandajo in the choir of S. Maria
Introducing Novella to Saint Anne.

[Illustration: Fig. 48. Agnolo di Polo. + Bust of Christ. + Painted clay.
Pistoia. Liceo Forteguerri.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio's formal development can be studied excellently in this work
become. Compared to the works considered so far, there is a stronger one
Relief and an increase in motifs can be seen that have not been seen before
could prove. For the later style of the master is named
the very rich folds of Mary's mantle are remarkable. The
Motifs are already piling up and might be unsettling, they say
not in the naked child's body with its large, calm surfaces
the other side an effective compensation. This Christ Child is in
all parts of the brother of the fish man, only here in the soft one
Thon the spongy and puffy of the child's body even better
It is expressed when it was mistreated there in the later patination
Bronze. We could already see the charming, graceful smile of the Madonna
perceive in David, here it is elevated to the feminine, lovely
and at the same time softened up. The hands, fleshy but nobly shaped,
provide the strongest evidence that the female marble bust
of the Bargello does not belong to Verrocchio, even with your hands
there with the finely pointed fingers as a beauty of its own
Wanted to see the model. He speaks of Verrocchio's painterly feeling
also the fact that he included the plinth of the relief in the composition
and thinks of it as a balustrade on which the pillow
rests and over the cloak of Mary with a couple of beautiful ones
Pleated motifs falls. So it was only the late Renaissance that merged again
ideal space with the real delimitation. The closed in the pointed arch,
blue painted rear wall with the dove spraying rays as a symbol of
Holy Spirit and the base with the badly painted inscription
(which have been left out in the figure) are later, disfiguring
Add.

It is now very educational to see how the workshop and
the school of the master comes to terms with this type of madonna: she
generalizes the form and softens the expression. The alleged
Madonna des Bargello (Fig. 24) from the Casa Medici
neither be the work that Vasari is about in the Grand Duchess's cabinet
saw one door, one would still like to do the handwritten execution of the
Recognize master. The Madonna is smooth and sweet in expression,
the Christ Child stiff in posture and without the warm smile.
Technically, the flat treated relief coincides with the
bruised wrinkles. With such critical deviations from
the peculiarity of the master may ultimately also affect the material
be pointed out. Verrocchio's secured works include
there are none made in marble; even with large orders
he left the execution of this material to assistants. In order to
but by no means should the very close relationship with this Madonna
his workshop can be denied. It is safe there, under
his eyes, as indicated by some subtleties. Only are
also the beauties, such as B. head and hand, remained empty without
the loving perfection that Verrocchio gives to these parts
lets grow.

A series of Verrocchiesk Madonna reliefs in clay, Robbia work and
colored stucco leans on with greater or lesser freedom
this marble work and thus proves that the marble relief is
has enjoyed great popularity. One of the most beautiful replicas recognizes
one in the glazed terracotta of the sacristy of S. Croce in Florence
(Fig. 25), of which a colored stucco replica is in the Berlin Museum
possesses (Fig. 26). There was one among the clay replicas
especially captivating through the delicate mildness of the Madonna's head
in the English art trade (at Mr. Dibblee in Manchester), while
a second in the South Kensington Museum in London (No. 7576) the motif
extended, in the execution coarsened (Fig. 27).

All these Madonnas give way more than in the representation of the child
in that of the mother from the sound original of Verrocchio. First
With them the Christ Child stands on the left side while it
at Verrocchio is on the right. Furthermore, these imitators are approaching
Strangely enough, much more so in the form of the child's body
blessing Christ Child of Desiderio on the famous tabernacle of
S. Lorenzo as the child type of her master. In front of some you can
pronounce certain stage names, e.g. B. before that pretty stupid
Marble Madonna of Bargello with the cloud background, which is a work of
Francesco di Simone is (Fig. 28).

Only one of these Madonnas, closely related to Verrocchio - at Mr.
Quincy Shaw in Boston (Fig. 29) - emerges from what has been considered so far
Circles out. In his composition - the Madonna prays seated
the child lying on her lap, an angel who has stepped forward
based - the work is based on the famous four-figure picture of Fra
Filippo returns to the Uffizi. What Verrocchio to thank this master
should be appreciated when looking at his painterly products
become; the reference to the freely used model suffices here. The
very careful, extremely smooth and neat execution that something
stocky proportions of the Christ child, the lovely enthusiasm in the
Head of the angel, based on the David type, the sentimental one
The mood reminds one of Lorenzo di Credi, from whom we come from Verrocchios
know with their own lips that he was active as a sculptor, if not at all
secured sculptural work by him can be proven. The relief
was excavated on a villa formerly belonging to the Medici and
rested on a bronze pedestal, the two porphyry columns with excellent
chiselled bronze capitals. The frame also showed
Verrocchio's taste, like the relief, has a coloristic effect
his style.

Not so much the sculptors as the painters, however
Verrocchio's Madonna ideal made popular. And if there are names
like Botticelli, Ghirlandajo, Perugino, Credi, of the incomparable
Leonardo always apart, come into consideration, so they are allowed to
Their sculpting comrades receive praise for themselves
Freer from their role models of dryness and manners
have held. Of course, even the best of them can achieve this
little the master like them. Was there just one thing in emulation
so independently acting master the danger is doubly close, that
Tender to the weak, to reduce excess to the petty.
To some extent they were all subject to this danger. None
her Madonnas shine as grace and majesty as the one in S.
Maria Nuova hidden terracotta Verrocchios. Have in front of her alone
we have the feeling that we are at the turning point of a development that
Solving the problem of the Madonna. In no other
Madonna des Quattrocento so clearly announces the new attitude of the
High Renaissance, the civil to courtly, the informal
to the solemn, the reluctance of shyness in the reluctance of
Refinement transforms.

[Illustration: Fig. 49. + Malpaga, the castle of Colleoni. +]




X.


Shortly before Christmas in 1473 he passed away in his palace
Viterbo Niccolo Forteguerri, the Cardinal of Teano.

In the cardinal the Church not only lost one of its most loyal ones
spiritual servants, but above all one of their bravest and
most prudent military leader. Apart from its excellent
Abilities had friendly relationships established early on
to Enea Sylvia Piccolomini (later Pope Pius II) the talented
Lawyers started their brilliant career. Since he was from Eugene IV
Appointed administrator of the papal patrimony based in Viterbo
had become, he had an ever increasing preference for residence
in the “city of beautiful fountains” where he is in his palace
recovered from the wars and grew his garden.
The hometown of Pistoja seldom saw him. But she received the famous one
Son always with great pomp, especially in 1460 when he got the red
Hat received, and a few years later before he became papal
Legate went to Pisa to bring the troops to the crusade against the Turks
to gather. Even after the six-year pontificate of Pius II.
he remained in close contact with the Holy See. He did it
Enthronement of the new Pope Paul II, and again that in 1471
Conclave met, Forteguerri's name appeared on the list of
Papabili. In the meantime, it was not he, but Cardinal Rovere who went
The name Sixtus IV assumed from the election.

With the passage of time in the abundant exercise of public
Charity as much as the draft of his benevolent heart
following, the cardinal founded the Liceo in the year of his death
Forteguerri to Pistoja, with the task of continuing to poor students
help. He might be grateful for remembering that in his depressed
Youth the Scholarship of the Operai of S. Jacopo alone him the visit
of the Universities of Bologna and Siena and with it his honorable career
had made possible.

When he was worn out by the rigors of the campaigns on December 21st
1473, barely fifty-four years old, in his beloved Viterbo die
Closing one's eyes, one did not fail to honor one's memory forever. When
Titular Cardinal of San Clemente in Rome, he was buried there and
Mino da Fiesole erected the tomb for him, which we have only been using since 1891
see again in its original form (Fig. 30). At the same time
decided the council of his hometown Pistoja in a meeting of
January 2, 1474, for the erection of a grave of honor in a suitable place
to throw out the sum of 300 gold florins.

Among the five models that were available two years later,
that of Andrea del Verrocchio from Florence the greatest number of
Votes and was accepted for execution (May 5, 1476). Alone
the project soon faced difficulties. First
Verrocchio increased his demand to 350 ducats, and during
about it still the negotiation went back and forth, used part of the
Commission, the Operai of S. Jacopo, the presence of Pieros del
Pollajuolo to get a new model. Now they stood
Opposite parties: Andrea could keep to the contract, for
Piero's model was followed by the family as well as the authority of S. Jacopo
of the deceased and public opinion. In a letter dated
March 11, 1477/78, the Operai turned to their protector Lorenzo
de 'Medici, to whom they presented the models at the same time. With the
undetectable answer is an important document for both us
Lorenzo's artistic taste, as well as his tactful conveyance
got lost between two equally close artists. The
Facts indicate that Lorenzo chose Verrocchio's model
Has decided.

For Verrocchio an unusually cursory clay sketch in the
South Kensington Museum London will be valuable by giving us the
presents a superb composition (Fig. 31). Verrocchio stood
this time a completely different task than with the Medicimonument.
If he had to bring out the dignified in the inconspicuous there, so
the imposing was his only goal without any restriction.
With the imagination of a baroque master who entered with large crowds
painterly play begins and the resistance of the material smiling
Overcome, Verrocchio has the monstrous, of a niche arch
the spanned wall area enlivens. As a motif he chose the dawn of the
eternal bliss, into which the deceased is destined to enter. When
if he has shaken the heavy sleep of death from him, he kneels
Cardinal on the lid of the sarcophagus, and while in the lower
Region the three theological virtues of faith, hope and
of love hovering around him, angels wear almond-shaped glory
Christ himself as a gracious judge to the pious with folded hands
looking up princes of the church. Where those who work next to him
Master only the laying up of the dead in church during the
Knowing how to perpetuate parentation, Verrocchio has action and movement
given by giving the visionary forms that can be perceived by the senses.
The new and original of the composition is not restricted,
if one looks for the upper part with the mandorla on the relief of the
Belt donation from Nanni di Banco over the north door of the Florentine
Domes indicates that not only in the system, but also in individual
Motifs of the angels wearing the mandorla are exemplary for Verrocchio
has been.

[Illustration: Fig. 50. Giovanni Antonio Amadeo. + Tomb of
Bartolommeo Colleoni. +

Marble. Bergamo. Cappella Colleoni.

(The statue made of gilded wood is the work of two German
Artist, 1501.)]

The execution of the work disappoints them in the most sensitive way
Expectations raised by the design (Fig. 32). In rebuke this
Works of art with the "tastelessly treated robes" are all
Critics agree. But they overlook too much that, apart
from the later blemishes, including the original parts
Verrocchio's careful hand was not active. Take it though
Vasari and his scribes the figures of Christ with the angels,
of faith and hope for the master himself as claimed
also in the account books of 1483 only Verrocchio's name
is called, but here the style criticism must be of the documents
and disregard the literary tradition. Neither the guys
with their frozen friendliness still the bulging and desolate ones
crumpled folds make you think of Verrocchio. Here
pupils have been left to their own devices, the
Masters tried to outdo them and thus no external fault
Escaped imitation.

The Verrocchio School, headed by Lorenzo di Credi, has been since
1477/78 documentary evidence in Pistoja; later there is also Agnolo
di Polo is active there. On the other hand, since the same time for
Verrocchio carried out the work in Florence, so that for such a great work,
as his waited in Pistoja, was not even available. His
Group with Thomas and Christ approached completion, at the same time
he had to take care of the silver relief on the St. John's altar and
Already since 1479 he was busy with the preparatory work for his rider
for Venice. In addition, he had the order for the Forteguerrabmal
All kinds of differences entered from the start: the one that was thrown out
The sum did not seem sufficient to him and the advancement of Piero del
Pollajuolo will not have left him insensitive either.
Finally the material didn't suit him either. All reason enough here
only the superintendent, who is near Pistoja and Florence, yes
was easy to lead, to claim for yourself and to execute
To pass on assistants. Lorenzo di Credi comes before everyone else
Employees of the master in question.

The work seems to have been adequately promoted until 1483 among them
to have been. Verrocchio's permanent absence from Florence and his
rapid death then created just as disastrous delay as that
gradually lack of funds. After years of complete standstill, it closed
one with Lorenzetti, Giulio Romano's brother-in-law, whose too
Raphael occasionally for the execution of his three-dimensional designs
served, a new agreement (1514) and Lorenzetti chiseled without
to stick to the model, Caritas with the children and the
kneeling statue of the cardinal. But with this portrait statue that gave way
Artist so much from the intended position as part of the whole
from the fact that there was not enough space to classify them; and so
it is still in the Liceo today (Fig. 33). The completion of the
Back wall gave cause to convert the grave into an altar at which
Every year the feast of St. Bartholomew was celebrated. First
In 1753 Gaetano Masoni placed the sarcophagus with the weak bust and
the hideous weeping putti and led around the niche
tasteless baroque frame that gives the whole barbaric look
increases to unbearable.

A noticeable lack of drafts and sketches proves that Verrocchio
treated the work incidentally and with that, however, boldly and
peculiarly conceived drafts his personal artistic task
considered done. Still, one must have some of the preserved
Clay sketches with this work rather than any other in
Set relationship. This is where the flying angels belong first
Collection Thiers in the Louvre, full of real Verrocchiesken designs
Lovely, in lush curls and stormy fluttering, restless
rich wrinkling. You have set the example for many others who
later appear by name in the work of Robbia. On the
Verrocchio also has traces of Nanni di Banco with tradition
the long-stretched flying angels adopted from antiquity
Broken. A drawing from the Malcolm collection in the British
Museum of London, which is also a study of a mandorla-bearing
Angel is, besides the features of the outward appearances (silver pen,
white heightened on red primed paper) also stylistically the
Marks of the hand of Lorenzo di Credi and may therefore as
Preparation of this for the marble version, however
is considerably lower apply (Fig. 34).

[Illustration: Fig. 51. + Equestrian statue of Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze.

Venice. In front of the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo.]

At no point does the execution differ more decisively from this
Clay design than on the base of the sarcophagus. With a
Thoughtlessness, which almost objection to the authenticity of the sketch
excited, supports the sarcophagus, heavily burdened with the kneeling figure
a winged wreath, very similar to Donatello on the base
attached to his preaching group. Rests in the monument itself
the (not belonging) sarcophagus on a pedestal, the seated one
Shows angel putti with the inscription plaque in relief. These putti too,
which Donatello first used as an inscription bearer are special
popular with Verrocchio's school circles. There are two
Notice types of sitting and walking, one of which is having
fluttering robes and the clean, curly hairs on Credi, der
others with lank hair and sleek camisoles
Francesco di Simone goes back. A particularly good representation of the
first type in its direct connection to the base plate of the
Forteguerrigrabes owns the Berlin Museum (Fig. 35).

There we also find a clay relief with the Entombment, the above
the shape of the intended sarcophagus can provide information.
In my opinion, this has been trained with limitless care
“Sketch” is by far the most beautiful of all Verrocchio's designs
and in its consummation urges increased attention
similar, more carefree work (Fig. 37). In the kneeling
Nicodemus, who is supporting the body of the Lord on the right, has to go without it
Contradiction a portrait can be recognized, so individual are the mild ones
Eyes, the sharply curved nose, the energetic mouth. Lorenzettis
The portrait statue of Forteguerris, executed after 1513, shows im
Profile very related, albeit calmer features, as well as Minos in
Lying statue in Rome, only the curls are missing in both of them.
Nevertheless, the conclusion is probably admissible, in the Nicodemus of the relief
to recognize the cardinal himself. And if we now put this relief in the
Place in the middle of the front wall of the sarcophagus, surrounded by
the family and cardinal coats of arms can be a more meaningful suggestion
the generous charity that distinguished the deceased,
be conceived? And isn't it a deep and poetic thought
the divine in its deepest humiliation and its most glorious
Bringing exaltation into an equally intimate relationship with the deceased?
And finally, where would be for the deathbed of a high servant of the Church?
a more worthy representation than the burial of the one who is his model
was life like dying? So we would have the original
Shape of the sarcophagus analogous to Michelozzo's at the Brancaccigrabe in Naples
to introduce.

In connection with the Forteguerrimonument it should be mentioned
Tabernacle of Francesco di Simone in the Chiesa di Monteluce
Perugia pointed out (Fig. 36). Executed in colored painted marble,
the work strives for the effect of the popular Robbia works. In the
Most of the time, the details only show the student's inability to do so
to strive for emulation of empty imitation, at the same time in that
the blessing Christ Child and the decorative details
of Desiderio's manner, whose relationships to which have already been indicated
Verrocchio and his workshop are perhaps suited to the question
according to Verrocchio's teacher, to find a surprising solution.




XI.


The reasons given to our master by personal condolences
kept away from the work of the Forteguerrabes also determined him,
a similar commission in Florence in the hands of Franceso di Simone
to be entrusted after the composition has been determined. And yet
it was the tomb of someone very close to the Medici
Family.

The marital union of the daughter Francesca des through activities against
the Medicean politics severely compromised Luca Pitti with Giovanni
Tornabuoni, uncle of the Magnifico and head of the Medici
Branch bank in Rome, was in 1466 at the special instigation of Pieros des
Gout fragile occurs. After eleven years of marriage, died on September 23
1477 Francesca from the consequences of childbirth. The corpse was after
Florence transferred and there in S. Maria Novella, where the Tornabuoni her
Hereditary funeral possessed, buried. Verrocchio received the order
to erect the tomb, probably as a result of his close relationships with
the relatives of the family, the Medici. From this grave got
only remains are preserved that no longer allow reconstruction.
Presumably it was on one of the side walls of the tall rood screen,
the 1565 when the interior of the church was renovated by the Grand Duke
Cosimo I. was removed. Hence the main piece, the
Relief with the dying woman in childbed, from the Medicean property in the
Bargello has arrived.

[Illustration: Fig. 52. + Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze. Venice. In front
the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo.]

If we turn to the not entirely clear description of the inventory of the
Medici from 1666, we are allowed to use a sarcophagus
whose corners sat the allegorical figures of virtues, think; on
the front or above the relief was then attached and theirs
The composition ended with the portrait of the deceased in
a medallion. With that, Verrocchio would have a new shape for that too
Private grave found, which was carried on in Benedetto's Strozzig graves
should have.

But the relief that has been preserved alone offers enough of the new and
Peculiar. It falls into two parts, the one without any
architectural separation clearly gives the impression of two separate
Providing space: the nursery with the disaster that occurs
and the anteroom where the dismayed father and friends of the
House (Figs. 38 and 39). The oppressive air of the
civil tragedy strikes us. While right where the
Women who are exhausted are concerned, the loud wailing screams echo,
over there, on the left, the pain in the presence of the men is more wordless,
more restrained, but no less shocking.

The depiction of loud lamentation and desperation in silence
Up to now, pain has been limited to the subject matter of the holy scriptures
remained. Verrocchio's clay relief of the Entombment shows
within how noble limits the master knew how to keep the affects, without
like Donatello, through excess the inner sovereignty of the reproach
to harm or, such as Antonio del Pollajuolo on the leaf
to touch the vulgar with the so-called "Death of Gattamelata".
The master also shows wise moderation on the Tornabuoni relief. The
Old woman pulling her stranded hair at the foot of the bed
and the boy at the head end tearing his pigtails ecstatically with hers
Screaming wide open mouths bring in the shrillest sounds
the harrowing melody of sorrow; but everything sounds around them
to muffled, low sounds down to the faint whimper that of
the lips of the dying tremble. The most moving speech is
the misery in the woman crouched down in front of the bed
stunned surrendered holding hands over ears so as not to hear the shouting
to hear the plaintive and the sighs of the mistress. Listen in the anteroom
the father with the clan on every note that comes out. No doubt
are all portraits, not just the father Giovanni with him
characteristic shopkeeper face of the Florentine merchants, including the
somewhat clumsy youths on the left, those in the elevator only the embarrassed
Mark the shy conventional participants. And now step under the
Group the wistful mother with the newborn and bring them to the father
News that it's coming to an end over there.

With the sure gaze of the playwright, the artist got out of the process
of the painful events, the two moments are singled out in
to whom the main characters of this civil tragedy, the father
and call the mother the highest attendance of the viewer. What him
supported in this, may in part on the tradition of his hometown
can be traced back to the art of exciting storytelling like
was not practiced and mastered anywhere else in Italy; on the other hand, hardly
to a lesser extent the merit of the master remains untouched,
because he has just recognized the most fertile moments.

In spite of the wealth of figures, the composition nowhere loses clarity
and clarity. He is in a free, painterly way
Relief style handled; but the sculptor did not, like Ghiberti,
any encroachments into the seductively neighboring area of ​​the
Painting permitted. He gives no perspective of the premises,
in which we find ourselves. It works exclusively with the bis
in the finest nuances of a portrayal of a great,
passionate emotion that empowers all
Coincidences away to the pure sources of the Eternal Human
leads. Who asks the status and name of these figures? The
The incident is so generally clear that the question of the from
those affected by this misfortune do not stop until the excited participation
cooled down too calmly.

From a technical point of view, the relief cannot be praised for anything good.
Except for broken limbs and bumped heads
Disturb the impression, the marble work is dry and petty. Namely
the folds that Verrocchio could not make rich enough,
shows how mindless the student has transferred the model. Also
in the body proportions, which for the most part are unnaturally compressed
are, of some equally unnaturally elongated women's bodies
apart from that, an insecure student hand reveals itself. The shortening
the slightly inclined bedstead, which incidentally has the shape of the
ancient ~ lectus ~ resting on ornate posts has failed.
The partly empty-friendly, partly sullen heads with their heavy ones
Eyelids and the stiff posture are also indicative of
Francesco di Simone like the piece of arabesque ornament on them
Bedpost.

The same hand is seen in the statuettes of the virtues, the
Madame André preserved in Paris (Figs. 40-43). To the three theological
Virtues, faith, love, hope that should adorn every Christian,
righteousness comes with sword and (missing) scales that
the deceased was probably to be especially praised. In your
I don't even want to go to the conventional attitude anymore
Attributing Verrocchio's invention. In addition, three of these appear
short-legged, stiff-seated allegories in literal repetition
the tomb of the lawyer Tartagni in San Domenico in Bologna,
the signed major works by Francesco di Simone (Fig. 44).

       * * * * *

[Illustration: Fig. 53. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +

(After an original photograph by C. Naya in Venice.)]

The relief with the beheading of John the Baptist, the Verrocchio
Busy around the same time, not only offers substitutes for that
Virtuoso performances in the perspective representation of space,
which one searches in vain on the Tornabuoni relief, but must, since it
is chased in silver for all lost goldsmith's work
Compensate master. The dossale, how to look at the magnificently dainty one
Silver altar called the guild of merchants the patron saint of theirs
Donated father city, was already in 1402 in the Gothicizing
Trecento style completed down to the side panels. The production
of the two bronze doors awarded to Ghiberti, for which like everything
what served for the artistic decoration of the baptistery, the
Calimara guild had to take care of the liquid funds so in
Claimed that the continuation of work on the dossale aside
had to be pushed. Just before the second door was exhibited
Michelozzo 1452 the silver statue of the Baptist for the one left empty
Central niche on the front. Finally in 1477 it was decided that
To have work that has been commissioned for over a hundred years completed.
The choice of stories was natural; after life
of the Baptist in eight reliefs on the front of the departure into the
Desert was depicted until the threatening appearance before Herod,
All that remained for the left side wall was the meeting of the holy women
and the birth, for the right the feast of Herod with the dance
the Salome and the beheading left. The job fell to Antonio
del Pollajuolo and Verrocchio, probably not without the advice of
Medici, who set the tone in the guild. Pollajuolo handed three,
Verrocchio made two wax models. But now a few mingled
proper goldsmiths and offered their craftsmanship with success
at. Eventually the parties agreed to all four artists
to be entrusted with the creation of one relief each (January 13, 1479). At
Verrocchio was beheaded (Fig. 45).

Two statuettes made of clay with the greatest care - the one from
Back seen older warrior reaching for the mace and
the compassionate, curly youth with the bowl - both in possession
of Baron Adolphe Rothschild in Paris, teach the way to know
Verrocchio prepared the work. So he becomes every single figure
Modeled in clay and then sent to the workshop for transfer to the
Have left precious metal. Because an abundance of awkwardness
in the state of the figures and of formal errors that indicate the lack of
Let the student in question close, also necessary
To deny that this relief was executed by the master himself.
Or would Verrocchio ever have one so detailed and yet so
to be guilty of a misunderstood act, as is certainly the case in the model
magnificently performed back figure of the naked executioner?

Verrocchio did the mostly in the representation of the feast
the scene involved and the execution
accompanying figures increased beyond the usual number. Also in
In this relief he proves the playwright's accuracy: he
chooses the moment when the sword of the executioner the reckless
Keeping Herod's promise, and the short span between that
Flashes of the bare edge and the death sigh of the beheaded
the feelings suddenly loud among the witnesses of the sad incident
can be. With the numbness of a guillotine
The executioner brings the machine to a relentless blow; right
one of the aged centurions of the bodyguard is inflamed with them
Action threatening conflict of opinion about the frivolity of this
Murder; over there among the younger warriors there is pity, horror
and loathing. And kneel in the midst of the quarrel of words and feelings
the victim, mute, ready to die, immersed in humility and prayer. Just
a great master could devise these opposites and so effectively
work out.

The relief is a treasure trove for the knowledge of ornamentation
Verrocchio. This is also supported by the care that the person performing
Silversmith precisely these parts of the work, the practice of his
Hand accordingly, has grown. You can find them there
at the washbasin, lion and wolf masks as joint heads observed the
Rosettes and palmettes, the scales on the bracers and greaves,
the dragon wings on the helmet - all decorative forms in this abundance
are not familiar to any other artist of the time. The Koller close,
like the David, so tight that the muscles run through the leather
draws; the gaiters that leave the toes come back again
in front. Hands and feet are very delicately shaped, even with that
small scale of the figures does not lack the indication of the veins and the
Skin folds. The position of the characters is free and secure, and difficult
shortened positions are sought rather than avoided. The one from the back
seen warriors with legs apart, the one in a rising
Anger spreads from the right to the mace in the left
not to shy away from a comparison with Castagno's famous Pippo Spano.
And if so, as with the young man on the left with the wonderfully driven one
Copper bowl, the position seems uncertain and prancing, is flat
only the assistant failed to do justice to the master's intention.

The characters of the two live in the characters shown
most outstanding works of the master, which he simultaneously with
this relief deal with echoes and premonitions. Of the
John's head appears as a slight modification of the Christ who
sympathetic youth like a relative of Thomas in the group
to Or San Michele. In the angry warriors one could study for
Colleoni speculate; here as there the master strives for the expression
wild size.

When Verrocchio takes the gruesome process out of the gloom of the
Prison walls, in which it usually happens, into one
splendid hall relocated in the style of Brunelleschi's pazzi chapel,
so it corresponds to the pursuit of splendor and solemnity, that
is a special feature of his aristocratic art. Be
A feeling of beauty saved him from the aesthetic mistakes of others
Artists who moved the scene a few moments further
showing off with the bloody head on the silver bowl and that
trunk still kneeling with the blood stream that cut through it
Veins in the arch spurting from swelling. Nothing speaks so much for him
perfect art understanding of the master than that he is the highest
dramatic tension with the commandments of beauty in a pure
knew how to bring artistic harmony. The dreadful one
Donatello tried his strength with a certain voluptuousness, she went
Verrocchio's more delicate nature instinctively out of the way.

[Illustration: Fig. 54. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +

(After an original photograph by C. Naya in Venice.)]

Three years after its completion (1480) the dossal was made for the first time
set up, but not as originally intended when
festive cladding wall of the altar table, but as an altar piece.
From the confusing shine of the reflecting in a thousand lights and
You can still use sparkling precious metal with the stones and enamels
nowadays get an impression when the altar as regular since
1483, on the feast of St. John, from the Museo dell 'Opera over
into the baptistery and the glittering shrine above
devoutly agitated crowd like the holy grail glowing.




XII.


No other work leads so deeply into the irregular, often interrupted
and fragmented working method of our master as the main work
its second epoch, the group of Christ and Thomas at the
East facade of the Or San Michele church (Fig. 46). Erected at the
busiest thoroughfare in the city, right in the middle of the one with the
Wide-arched windows decorated front, the work leaves no one
passed without the tribute of admiration and gratitude for his
Creator.

The assignment for this work leads back to the beginnings of the
Verrocchio's artistic activity. When the silk guild (Arte di
Por Santa Maria) in the first half of the fourteenth century
undertook to rebuild the church, committed it (1339)
Mediation of the signory the twelve most powerful guilds and the party
guelfa on each of the thirteen outer pilasters a tabernacle with the
Set up images of their patron saint. While the guilds after
and according to the undertaking entered into, were sufficient, if not
Without a warning from the Signory (1406), the guelfa party met with
1418 measures by awarding her pillar to Donatello with the
Order, in the tabernacle St. Louis of Toulouse, the special one
Patron saint of the Guelphs. The final payment to Donatello
(1423) may also indicate the date of the completion of the whole.

Only the People's Party, always with the Medici at its head
began to dominate public life more victoriously, it succeeded
soon to bring the guelfa party to their memorial. Late 1459
She was forced to take her tabernacle to the College of the Commercial Court
to resign, and in 1463 the paralyzed party was given 150 gold guilders
compensated. Meanwhile the statue of St. Ludwig already removed
been, presumably, to S. Croce, where it is still today above the interior
Main portal stands; the hated coats of arms were chiseled off, and
Luca della Robbias medallion with the emblem of the commercial court
was emblazoned over the tabernacle. This housing that in its pure
Renaissance forms fully satisfied the taste of the time, remained
consist; for the new figurative filling of the niche,
around 1465, Verrocchio.

One can probably assume that the favor of the Medici, with their
Reputation and their money supported the People's Party, Verrocchio too
entered this task. With the help of the documents we can
closely control the slow progress of the great work. The
by far the most frequent payments fall between the years 1476 and 1480.
In 1482 the head of the Mercanzia bought Verrocchio's clay model
and have it set up in their office with the express
Justification that the draft of such a completed work of art received
must stay. In April 1483, just before the date of installation,
becomes the master for his work in respect of its excellence
and superiority over the other statues erected there
A total of 800 gold guilders was awarded. Finally done on June 21st
the setting of the figures in the tabernacle, what that is about
mentioned diary of Luca Landucci reported.

Verrocchio's move to Venice took place regularly
the payouts as well as the completion of the missing ones
Little things impaired. 1487 is made at the request of the master
determined how much money he still owed as the balance; the
outstanding sum that may not exceed 200 gold guilders,
should only be paid to him on the condition that he used it as a
Marriage property for the daughters of his needy brother Tommaso at the
State debt administration deposit, an obligation, the Verrocchio
is complied with in will. The request of the Mercanzia, the
Capitals, the consoles of the supporting base and the coat of arms (in
Wreaths worn by the angels) to be completed is evident
not consistently met; at least the round is still today
of the wreath empty. -

Thomas groping the side wound of the Lord when in doubt about the truth
of the return of his master, is one in the Italian
Plastic is a rare reproach. One of the earliest representations of the
Mystery can be seen on the bronze door of San Paolo Fuori in Rome:
there Thomas approaches the Lord from among the disciples. Shortly before
Verrocchio had Paolo Uccello the process over the door of the now
painted together with the Mercato vecchio church of San Tommaso,
but only incurred Donatello's hurtful ridicule. Verrocchio
was faced with a task that nobody would solve in the sense of the Renaissance
sought, let alone found, before him (Fig. 47).

The coming together of two figures to form a closed group is
one of the most difficult compositional problems. In the present case
the task was made even more difficult by the fact that the existing niche
was originally only intended to accommodate one figure. Through spatial
Nanni di Banco was already limited in the line-up of his four
Saints in the tabernacle of the forge in the worst embarrassment,
to free him from the hand, which only Donatello energetically pruned him
would have known. Verrocchio has the difficulty with that playing and
ingenious ease overcoming even the worst hardship to one
seems to transform welcome chance.

The vibrancy and beauty of the group relies on that
different heights of the figures and their position too
each other. Because Christ, moved into the depths of the niche,
stands raised on a pedestal and with a barely noticeable twist
the pure face view emerges to the right, the shape wins
in importance also according to the mass in front of the profile
disciples approaching deeper plane. Becomes through this opposition
the front and profile position the feeling of space to the strongest
stimulated, resembles the wonderfully speaking, exalted right hand of Christ
with their slight protrusion both the height differences of the position
out as they are also the connection between the levels within which
the figures are intended to convey. How expressive and convincing
is this gesture that moves from eloquent demonstration to blessing
want! How dramatic is Thomas's heartbeat, its outline
with a moving line across the strict architectural framework
pushes out! Almost trembling, this elegantly shaped, but little feel
spiritual hand to the holy place where the lance of Longin the
deep wound on the side. In humility the eyelids drop over them
embarrassed eyes, and the head tilts so that the great silence
Shine from the forehead of the Risen One on the curly hair of the
beloved, now finally won doubters.

[Illustration: Fig. 55. Guidizani. + Medal with the portrait of
Bartolommeo Colleoni. + Bronze. Berlin. Kgl. Coin Cabinet.]

When designing this new, completely independently invented
In Verrocchio, the naturalist has the Semitic type of Christ
Regular character cannot and do not want to overlook. More through the
Purity as through the beauty of the individual forms is at work here. And
how much Verrocchio met the requirements of his time,
proves the judgment of that conscientiously booking Luca Landucci:
this is the most beautiful head of Christ that art has formed so far. In
large, powerful folds, the robe surrounds the body, which is powerful
without fullness, sinewy without thinness, appears as a transfigured body.
The sandals are attached to the feet with simple toggle straps.

Something of the elegance of the rich young man lives in Thomas
Gospel. Scripture knows nothing to report that he was about
towers over the simple fishermen and customs officers through their position and tradition
would have. But the master who finishes the Madonna from her
Bourgeoisie raised to the realm of courtly nobility, ennobled too
the simple disciple of Christ to a youth of noble decency and
Be. In this Thomas the conception of the coming is announced
Century, that, especially under Raphael's example, the hitherto
limited and laborious-looking apostles conform to the ideal of
Cortegiano, that "idea of ​​the aristocratic all-round man"
has approximated. Here Verrocchio anticipates one side of the ideal
shaped: the grace of the external appearance. It also served him
as a means of characterization for the superficial materialist,
which, as it depends on the external appearance of things, also depends on its external appearance
Used care. With intentional taste, these curls are
ordered and seem to smell of fragrant ointment. In multiple
broken, artificial folds, the coat falls over the left one
Shoulder to feet, whose beauty is enhanced by the jewelry of the
Footwear is lifted. The figure is slim and noble, but the
Beauty of the external appearance on which the full daylight falls,
not the expression of deep inwardness: a delicious vessel without
Content. Now the moment has come when she froze in doubt
Soul awakens shamefully to the bliss of which the Master gives her
speaks: Blessed are those who do not see and yet believe.

Among the completely resolved difficulties, these everywhere
Group has commanded during the execution is due to the effortless display
and arrangement of the characteristic limbs, hands and the
Feet the highest praise. Everything is clear and open without blackout
and without being forced into days. In the two different hands
which widen the breast slit is once again, as in focal points,
the characteristic of the two carriers of the action collected and
spatially as close as possible. On the other hand appear
the raised hand of Christ and the laterally extended foot of Thomas
like the widely spaced poles between which the outer and
inner movement twitches and vibrates.

Regardless of these advantages, the work of art is not spared from censure
remained. + Burckhardt + discovered motifs from in the group
most beautiful feeling, also found the movement of Christ powerful
convincing, the two heads almost wonderfully free and beautiful. Nevertheless
he and, to an even more alarming degree, + Rumohr + collided with him
cumbersome, wrinkled folds, on the “very tasteless
treated garments ”. And recently Rumohr's further rebuke
In this group the character disappears from the artist under the
Endeavor to exhaust it completely, still aggravated to that
Motive is generally too low.

This all too one-sidedly emphasizes certain weaknesses of the work
In relation to exhibitions, the
Unity of structure and depth of sensation are emphasized.
In the whole Quattrocento one will find such an impressive,
so safe and round looking for closed group. If anywhere, so
the formal bias of time seems to have been overcome here. Of course
in Thomas's coat the playful restlessness of the little,
complacent fold motifs are criticized, but only as
a tribute that Verrocchio paid to his time. One shied too much
the large open spaces and would rather cut them up than one
exposed himself to the charge of emptiness. In detail all result
these motifs logically result from the movement of the figure; that they heaped us
appear, is due to the training of our sense of form through the
great masters of the classical period. The higher the art rises
Verrocchios, when the joy of the individual was never to the detriment of the
Torn it all away. A wise deliberation has taken care
that the clarity of the motif and the body position nowhere through
the wealth of wrinkles suffer a loss. One likes about the endeavor of the
Masters in the treatment of garments to be of a dissenting opinion
it must be that opposite the Tone Madonna from S. Maria Nuova the
Thomas Group made progress in rounding and easy swelling
which means wrinkles. Vasaris always has this in matters of the profession
Unbiased and unclouded artist's eye recognized. "Thereby
that Andrea, writes the Aretine, the two figures in beautiful and
dressed in well-ordered robes, he proved that he was no less
like Donatello, Ghiberti and the others before him on the art of
Understood arrangements; the work therefore deserves it in
to be erected in a tabernacle by Donatello's hand. "

[Illustration: Fig. 56. + Part from the equestrian monument of Colleoni. +]

The question of the pathetic in Verrocchio arises in the face
this group consideration and response. Sticks easily
to pathos the connotation of the screwed-up, the phrase-like,
the artificially overheated, the untrue effective at what a
high feeling is deprived of its value. With such a
Insinuation would be done bitterly injustice to the old master. Verrocchios
Pathos is a dignified attitude; it presses for the sublime,
the great, the heroic. Verrocchio seeks the effect, but he does
controls him as he controls himself artistically. He leads the
Sensation to a height that allows the review of all that has gone before
permitted, but at the same time creates breathless tension in the viewer.
The dramatic remains more latent than z. B. with Donatello, but that
The soul unfolds all the more purely as it does not through any external unrest
and passion is pushed back.

All replicas that make up this masterpiece in whole or in
individual parts speak for the high esteem
of work than for the insightful understanding of its merits. In
the colored terracotta bust of Agnolo di Polo (Fig. 48) in the Liceo
Forteguerri at Pistoia the Christ head of the Master is empty and
mindlessly imitated. At the Conservatorio della Quiete, Giovanni della
Robbia modeled the whole group, but they by having Christ and
Thomas put on the same plan for her most striking beauty
brought.

The painters did not miss the model either. Signorelli
repeated the group on a fresco of the Sagristia della Cura des
Loreto Cathedral; Perugino borrowed the Thomas figure from his master
for one of the apostles on the fresco with the handover of the keys in the
Sistine Chapel in Rome.

After all, we find the group entirely and partly with the
Florentine woodcutters who started their business as
Book illustrators begin.

Peculiarities such as the leg bent at the side and bent at the knee
the drapery of the mantle of St. Thomas become artistic at all
Common good and enrich the treasure trove of shapes and motifs
the native to Florence as well as those from neighboring
Local schools provided for immigrant artists. -

Not only in the World Judge (on the Forteguerrigrabmal) and in the
Transfigured this group, Verrocchio embodied his ideal of Christ,
also for the Savior who suffers and dies on the cross he becomes one
have found a new strange expression. But we only have that
scant note from Vasari, concerning the existence of such in wood
carved crucifixes reported.




XIII.


It almost seems as if Verrocchio was chosen for that
one after the great tasks that can be given to the sculptor
the other to undertake and solve. The problem of two figures
to form a closed group follows, last and highest
Demand, the union of horse and rider; the Thomas group, that
Colleona monument; the pathetic the heroic ...

Our gazes rest longer and longer for the period of the Quattrocento
more lovingly on the promoters of the spiritual life than on them
politically active figures in whom admiration
A slight shudder from violence is used to mix blood and murder.
Among them we meet the representatives of the condottieretume,
Mercenary leaders who today feud with their host about whom they
yesterday supported. They stay away from their own politics, and
if they betray them, they do so on behalf of the power that controls them
has taken into her service for the moment. You feel
not bound, they go to their advantage and that of theirs in dear wages
standing tenants. They are at home on all battlefields.
They cross the peninsula from one end to the other with that
Exhilaration to live free and free to die and proud they look from
their heavy-hoofed battle horses down on the huddle below them.

Bartolommeo Colleoni was one of the last of these adventurers
at the same time one of the most magnificent disposition natures. Not his
Only deeds which history honors, his disposition
equally arouses our admiration. There was hatred, vengeance, and envy
far from him. To those who darkened his youth by calling their father
murdered and dragged his mother to prison with him, he forgave.
He was mild to the vanquished and the prisoners. The portraits of the most worthy
of his competitors in the war trade, one Niccolo Piccinini, one
Gattamelata, a Sforza surrounded him in his castle Malpaga and
with envious recognition he praised her merits. Remained sensitive
he against arrogance; a word of hurt from the Doge left him temporarily
break with Venice, in whose service he was almost his entire life,
although the city is his wife Tisbe Martinengo's favorite place to stay
was.

[Illustration: Fig. 57. + The baptism of Christ. + Florence. Academy.]

In search of a permanent place of residence, he chose his hometown
Bergamo as a residence and the nearby Malpaga Castle as
Pleasure stay (Fig. 49). He lived there eighteen years after he
the fortified castle with all kinds of conveniences, rooms for them
Servants etc. had been expanded. Became more and more numerous
the court that the aging man gathered around him. Not less
than six hundred horsemen were with him as his personal
Entourage. Malpaga became the scene of splendid visits to princes,
Tournaments and hunts, but also a place where the sciences
and arts found understanding care.

Here and in Bergamo the mighty man appeared as a builder and lover
of the fine arts, whereby he, as Reumont says, “of his
made use of colossal fortune that honored him more than
many of the means by which it had been brought together. "
He donated a loyal servant of the church near Bergamo in memory
to his late favorite daughter Medea the monastery della Basella
for Clarissines and otherwise gave the church plenty of consideration. Soon
after he, as a real child of the Quattrocento, lost his fame early on
concerned about his burial chapel in S. Maria Maggiore in the upper town
began (Fig. 50), he died on February 1, 1475 in his castle
Malpaga, just 75 years old. "Recommended to the Republic," he said
Venetian ambassadors who stood around his deathbed, “may never
again grant a general such unlimited power as
me."

He left one of the greatest generosity as he was
considerable part of his property belonging to the Venetian Republic.
At the same time, however, he declared with a truly sovereign sense of self
in his will: “He considers himself worthy, most devoted to the
To ask Signorie that she give him an ore equestrian monument to be eternal
Establish a memorial in St. Mark's Square. ”On July 30, 1479, they entered
about this in consultation and made the unanimous decision, the demand
to comply with the testator; only over the square did they keep that
last word before.

But one thing was certain from the start: the monument should be so magnificent
as possible. Artists were called from all sides, from whom one
required the model of a horse; for lay in the formation of the horse
just the difficulty. With those that have been uninterrupted for centuries
artistic relations between Venice and Florence cannot
Miracles take, albeit Verrocchio, an order in this regard
received. First he formed a life-size horse out of white
Wax, "a piece of great beauty". To get it duty free through the
Bringing the Duchy of Ferrara, Verrocchio called the mediation of the
Ferrarese ambassador in Florence and received from the Duke Ercole
free transit guaranteed. The model met in the fall of 1481
in Venice and was with two others by Vellano and Alessandro
Leopardi exhibited. The choice fell on Verrocchio's horse. At the same time
but the schemers began their game and pushed the old Paduan
Master Vellano so that he can make the rider. Verrocchio, the
as a stranger, the less to be resistant to such interventions
felt, destroyed his model by cutting off legs and head,
and turned his back on the city in anger. That let the
Signorie not offer; he shouldn't think of going to Venice
to return, she made him understand that he would be too
cut off the head. Verrocchio did not owe the answer,
anger thrusting the weapon into his hand, which was the Florentine
knew how to master before anyone else. Malicious, sharp and funny
he wrote back: he was not thinking of returning, otherwise
as you wish, but you should find it difficult to find him for the
cut off a new head, nor ever his
To give horses one who would be as beautiful as the one he was instead
that which was shattered could have given him back. These words hit
and struck with benevolent laughter at the artist's joke
the mood in his favor. He called with twice the salary
Senate Verrocchio back. Vellano, so brilliantly cut, pulled
growling home to Padua. The other back, Leopardi, left
volunteered the venue as he was due to irregularities in his
Mint had to flee to Ferrara. Only reaches after Verrocchio's death
this competitor also entered the plant.

The years that Verrocchio were granted until his death has
he mostly, but not exclusively, the equestrian monument
consecrated. There was so little in his way to just put an iron in the fire
How his financial situation has made him accept new orders
required. The draft for the tomb of a doge occupied him
Master temporarily. Then again he poured the artillery pieces for
the great council. Yes, he will take over a few days before his death
an obligation to the King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary
concerning the delivery of a marble fountain (Sept. 27, 1488). So came
it that death overtook him over the unfinished work.

The question of how far Verrocchio prepared and promoted the monument
have encountered all sorts of ambiguities. Vasari erroneously reports
the master died as a result of a cold while casting.
Verrocchio even beats his favorite student in his will
Lorenzo di Credi to the Senate so that “what I started
Work “complete. Meanwhile, Credi passed the order on to someone else
unknown Florentine sculptor Giovanni d'Andrea di Domenico (b.
1455) and explicitly mentions that Verrocchio had the figure and
leave the horse in the clay model. So it would be essential
had not been perfect, faithful Lorenzo would have the glory of his
Master is hardly jeopardized in such a careless way. It
So it was mainly about the casting. Proficient bronze casters
but believed the republic could provide the right man itself,
that Alessandro Leopardi, who as a coin cutter does the fine
Ciselier work certainly understood masterfully. About his dishonesty
she closed one eye magnanimously and called him free with assurance
Escorted back to Venice in 1489.

[Illustration: Fig. 58. + Head of John from the Baptism of Christ. +
Florence. Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Leopardi added the modest ornaments with the utmost restraint
the armor, the bridle and the saddlecloth, poured and gilded
the figure and placed it on the magnificent, with six pillars slender
emerging pedestal (Fig. 51). Your St. Mark's Square, this monstrous one
Reception and fame hall, gave the Venetians for the monument of
after all, not from a foreign military leader. If they instead
They did not care about the place in front of the Scuola di San Marco
Conscience from this scribbling about the clear wording of the will.
And like the master, like the servant. Through the inscription on the saddle girth
~ ALEXANDER LEOPARDVS VF OPVS ~ has Leopardi with well-calculated
Ambiguity of the Abbreviaturen the fame of the work on his person
tries to steer by having the dissolution of the ~ F. ~ in ~ fecit ~ or in
~ fudit ~. It is true that only the
Completion by Leopardi the speech and also Leopardis himself
Gravestone only praises him as the architect of the pedestal. To but
to silence all the voices that the Florentine masters
still about the proudest work of his suddenly broken life
want to bring does not have to be an obscure one at the dead letter
Inscription can be sliced ​​and rotated. The work itself lays clear
enough testimony for his true master.

Two Florentine artists, Paolo Uccello and Andrea del Castagno have
the first authoritative attempts made, equestrian monuments in the sense
of the Renaissance. Their condottier statues on the entrance wall
of the Florentine cathedral are works of painting, but with the
Intention to feign plastic works. Uccello, the twenty year
got to work earlier, has the task with the impetuous
Conscientiousness of the naturalist resolved, Castagno with the urge for it
heroic design, which, however, was called the master's rough peasant style
and since seduced to the clumsy. But just this basic mood
the pathetically excited encountered relatives in Verrocchio, and
Castagnos Niccolo da Tolentino certainly belongs among the works that are
impressed the youthful master's sense of life. To Uccello
he passed heedlessly. As Verrocchio then his model through the
Ferrarese area brought to Venice the artistic
Form of his future Colleoni already too firmly in him to get through
the sight of Baroncellis Reiter (Borso d'Este) in the square of the
Capital or by Donatellos in front of the Santo in Padua
Gattamelata still to be modified. Donatello's rider leads
Uccello's naturalistic endeavors, taking into account the ancient world
new goals. Verrocchios Colleoni achieved the ideal, the Castagno
as a result of a certain dullness and heaviness of its artistic
Imagination only suspected.

If Uccello is still in a strict profile position than his Hawkwood
Conceived relief, Castagno proceeded to a freer spatial picture.
Turning the horse's head out gives him the idea of ​​a
The depth of space that Uccello misses. The ratio is very similar
between Donatello and our master. The Colleoniross also turns
the head from the central axis sideways, to the left. From Castagno has
Verrocchio also adopted the gait of his horse. Not only that
he, taking into account the fashionable pace, made a passerby
rather, the relationship lies in the type of leg position
with the raised forefoot and the far back
Hind leg. Hence both of them are accused of not being free
striding, but a horse pulling an invisible load
to have depicted. You can also use subordinate peculiarities
show the relationship: in the strong folds of the neck, in which
Tuft of hair tied up between the ears like a tuft.

Otherwise Verrocchio is infinitely superior to the older master
(Fig. 52). The strong structure of the horse's body has it on none
End led to clumsiness; there is a lot of elegance in the massive
walking crowd. With an almost graceful curve, a little restless
in outline through the high croup the steed trots along; it is believed
to hear the sound of heavy hooves. The head with the something broad
protruding lower face and the curls parted over the forehead
the mane outshines the broad-mouthed in beauty, in proportion
head of the Castagnorosses uneven at the body. Like it here on one
If it touches the stocky bull's neck, it bends in a beautiful curve
over a neck that is still slender for all its fleshiness. In noble
The nostrils and the fire of the brave stallion puff out violently
sprays out of the eyes.

The anatomy of the animal body is evidence of astonishing expertise. The
With all its muscles, veins and skin folds, she seemed all too contemporaneous
complacently put on display, and so they judged the steed
have the appearance of a skinned horse. We'll get into it exactly
as in the mane carefully laid out in ringlets
observed property of the meticulous detailing everywhere
Determine master anew.

The rider almost sits on this more tight than compact animal
upright straight between the high trestles of the saddle (Figs. 53 and 54).
“Colleoni on horseback,” complains Wölfflin, “has enough energy, one
iron strength, that alone is not the beautiful movement. ”That should
they don't even be. The Venetians sat stiffly in the saddle, and
their way of riding is mocked at the Cortigiano. But here she came
to endow the expression with energy and size in its straightness. It
is the embarrassment of almost all sculptors, the figure of the rider of the
to bring out the mighty expansive mass of the horse.
Verrocchio succeeded.

With the left twisted, as if in a surge of bold defiance
Shoulder, which the head follows, the rider makes the movement of the horse
With. The rider's head clearly and freely overlaps the top of the
Horse and easily dominates over the whole. A balaclava
covers the huge head with threatening eyes. The determination
the movement and the power of the gaze are already at the height of the
new style, the art of the Cinquecento. In David, by the way, too
shows the motif of the exposed shoulder in the bust of Giuliano
we find the preliminary stages to this ruthless magnitude of movement.
But the type is new and surprising. Do we have a portrait?
of Colleoni?

[Illustration: Fig. 59. + Christ's head from the baptism of Christ. + Florence.
Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

Verrocchio never has the Venetian captain face to face
seen. But he was able to be faithful to the Guidizani medal
Take a portrait of his hero (Fig. 55). But it was evident
in his imagination a hero of a more terrifying size
more powerful lion head (~ caput leonis ~) than the toothless one, with a slight weight
overhanging nose and bushy brows powerful, but not
Significantly looking head on the medal. So the master took
in his ideal portrait only a few characteristic details: the
Beardlessness, the powerful neck, the sinister brows and the
blazing look. Otherwise he broke away from all portraits
go with the feeling that the representative of his class must go here
all are represented. This is another train, the Verrocchio
makes it an immediate forerunner of classical art; the
the high renaissance was definitely more weighty
than individual fidelity. Like Michelangelo in the generals of the
Medici graves, Verrocchio also has the character, not the fleeting one
Appearance of personality recorded.

Heads in which the domineering, increased to savagery, is found
said Verrocchio already in the silver relief of the beheading
created by the Baptist. He just needed guys like the two of them
arguing field captains there to resort to the basic form of the
to grasp the new character head. But he had to + one + move now
to the dominant position, which Herod's rude captains did not
suitable: the superiority of a high intelligence. She tames them
ruthless determination in this general's face, it shines
from the menacing eyes, she has the commanding mouth with a pull of
Contempt for the world circumscribes (Fig. 56). Verrocchio chose the age
in which the force of action still holds up unbroken against the first
Signs of diminishing physical freshness, the transition that the
Heroic appearances as the emanation of an indomitable will
leaves. The flesh is already losing its firmness, it hangs down
Wrinkles deepen, but the inner fire burns with old embers.

Compared to those who carefully consider the details
Modeling of the horse's body can only be seen in the large ones
The head applied to the decisive shapes hardly has the same master hand.
There were also voices that supported the whole rider
Leopardi have claimed others to be part of a workforce
thought of Leonardo, who has nowhere really been proven since 1481. who
Leopardi's petite, exclusively decorative species becomes the
reject the first of the two unreasonable demands as resolutely as the second
becomes obsolete by the recently established fact that
Leonardo has been working on the equestrian monument of Sforza in Milan since 1481.
And finally, for the horse it was necessary to show precise knowledge and
Revitalization of large areas; the rider's head had to because of the effect
from on high to be held in great general forms.

Eight years after the master's death, on March 21, 1496, that could
Monument to be unveiled. Since that time the parties have almost
continuously churned, the work of the foreigner to the merit of one
Attributed to locals. The work itself has everything defamatory
Disgraced talk. The Florentine, nobody dares to do it anymore
doubt, the world owes its greatest equestrian monument.
The same Verrocchio who, in the work of his youth, in David, the
Morgenglanz represented young, barely self-conscious heroism,
embodied the hero in his perfection in his last.
Nobody has surpassed his performance, but hardly anyone has his either
still inexperienced art trained on it. Leonardo's Francesco Sforza
perished in the model, and so Albrecht Dürer remains the only one
who with his "Knight Death and the Devil" bears witness, with which
astonished admiration one of the greatest looked up to the "~ statua
gentilissima del gran commendatore ~ ​​“.




XIV.


The figure of the painter Verrocchio cannot be compared with the same
Work out sharpness like that of the sculptor. The material is a
incomparably more restricted, and what laboriously from the absent-mindedness
has been brought together again gives rise to much
Doubt. It is true that by and large there is agreement on what
falls under the artistic term Verrocchio, but what is called the
Master’s own thing to look at remained undecided. Man
also varies with regard to the appreciation of these paintings. Dem
childlike, presumptuous judgment of a French scholar: Verrocchio
would have done wiser if you had ever shut your brush and palette fingers
the overestimation of everything that carries Verrocchio's name,
abruptly opposite.

The written tradition does not provide a secure basis; she is
incomplete and hides their ignorance behind amusing little histories.
According to Vasari, Verrocchio's artistic ambition alone should go to painting
have led, “as one who has excelled in + a +
Areas were not enough ”. How the mood brought him to the art of painting
should he then be displeased with the better performance of his pupil
Driving Leonardo never to touch his brush or palette again.
One is as little in the character of our Master as the other.
His passion for technical experimentation, the appreciation for his time
the art of painting, and the competition with his
Artistic comrades embraced him early on in painting
driven.

A number of lost works are also reported here.
Three large canvas paintings with Hercules, the Albertini 1510
in the room of the old council in the Palazzo Vecchio are perhaps
identical to those mentioned in the Medicine's inventory, which was published in 1495 by the
Signory were confiscated. They also point to that of Antonio del
Pollajuolo preferred subjects like the battle of naked men,
which Verrocchio had intended as a design for a facade and which
also went down.

[Illustration: Fig. 60. + The angels from the baptism of Christ. + Florence.
Academy.

(The kneeling angel on the left by Leonardo da Vinci.)

(After an original photograph by Giacomo Brogi in Florence.)]

Only one of the works received is certified and verifiable:
the baptism of Christ, painted for the Vallombrosan monks at San Salvi
and is currently installed in the Florence Academy (Fig. 57).
The wooden panel is almost square, the figures are about two
Third life-size. The painting has a reputation for being unfinished
be; wrongly, because the monks hardly have an unfinished job
accepted and paid for. If it still gets the impression
of the unfinished, it is due to the impermanence of it
Technology. The madder red in the baptist's coat and in the meat
has faded, so wherever it appeared as a glaze; up to
the degree to which the picture was “completed” is sufficiently shown by the fine ones
Gold braids. With this red in the coat, the light, delicate blue in the
The painting must be similar to the lining and the strong flesh tone
Color mood has shown how Antonios del Pollajuolo's works. At
he is also reminded by the play of light and the metallic sheen of the
Colours.

[Illustration: Fig. 61. + Heads of the kneeling angels from the baptism
Christ + Florence. Academy.

(The head on the left of Leonardo da Vinci.)

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

The figures, especially the Baptist, are sinewy and gaunt
Contour is hard and angular. The modeling goes on all anatomical
Details conscientiously. The peculiarities of the verrocchiesque type
can best be seen on the head of the Baptist: the flatness
of the eye and surrounding parts, the high, arched forehead that
incorporated corners of the mouth (Fig. 58). The folds are flat and
pressed, sheet-like, always plastic.

The Master reveals himself less pure in the figure of the Savior.
Christ appears shifted from the original outline, whereby the
Shape got the insecure state. The technology also gives way to
this part of the painting from the right. Here has one with
more intimately familiar with the effects of oil painting
Traces can also be felt in the head of Christ. We owe her
the softer transitions, the delicate half-light, the airy, loose fullness
of the hair (Fig. 59).

The difference between the two hands is even clearer in
perceptible to the pair of angels kneeling on the left (Fig. 60). The tight
heads together (Fig. 61) lay quite different from two
individualities of nature. The one that only up to the
Hand painted angels visible, goes with painstaking conscientiousness
according to nature. The other who created the angel kneeling in profile,
selects the beautiful line from the rich juxtaposition of the natural model
puts grace in posture, soul in expression and spreads fragrance
and shine over the structure of their artistic imagination. That we
Vasari is allowed to recognize Leonardo in this personality
believe your word. The young master who worked in all parts of the
Figure, not at least in the richness of the garment and that of
Verrocchio there unmistakable wrinkling, too
still in the tuft of grass that is darkly showing against the white piece of clothing
as it were noted with his monogram on the board.

Leonardo is also one of them, albeit with some caveat
landscape leading far into the background. We pursue
the course of the Jordan along the rocky river banks and are in
a Tuscan landscape very similar to that of Leonardo on the
known sheet in the Uffizi with the date 1473. The
rocky backdrop that pushes in on the right and that looks like it is made of iron
showing the cut palm on the left, executed in pure tempera, again
the hand of the older and more severe master.

[Illustration: Fig. 62. Lorenzo di Credi. + The baptism of Christ. +

San Domenico near Fiesole.]

With the wealth of form knowledge that we gain from the in-depth
Consideration of Verrocchio's sculptures can be
dare to draw conclusions about the time of origin of this panel. The
especially in the nude, a somewhat unfree replica of nature and
the wrinkling, that of the wealth and verve of the Thomas group
removed, allow an early emergence to be inferred. A lot
still reminds of the bronze David. If I look at the years around 1470
Discussion, I am in agreement with Vasari's statements
about Leonardo's workforce. Very early, soon after 1465, is
Leonardo had come to Verrocchio's workshop; it is already there in 1472
as an independent master in the guild list. As such, he hardly becomes
have completed more works of his teacher.

Serious and sustained solemnity characterize the basic mood of the
Work. The landscape with its veiled shine is bearing
contributes significantly to raising this mood. But she is not allowed to
Inferences about the landscaper Verrocchio are misused,
who only expressed himself very modestly in this picture.
Compared to the predecessors, who presented the same material,
a Baldovinetti, Fra Angelico, even Piero della Francesca,
Verrocchio asserts himself as an innovator, not in the traditional one
Position of the figures to each other, but rather in the freedom of
Movement and the illusion of space by giving up the rigid profile and
Facestations. In this respect no example can be traced back to
On the other hand, Verrocchio's baptism has eagerly established a school like that
Altarpiece by Lorenzo di Credi in San Domenico near Fiesole (Fig. 62)
and Ghirlandaios fresco in S. Andrea zu Brozzi near Florence.

A second plaque that Vasari considered particularly successful in the possession of
The nuns of San Domenico in Florence are mentioned in a post
manifold wanderings now to Budapest in the National Gallery
preserved enthroned Madonna recognized with saints and angels.
The painting shows verrocchieske if it is poorly preserved
Shaping, but by no means the care and the sensation that from
handwritten works of the Master of the Baptism of Christ are inseparable.
Heard with some, compositionally closely related images
according to its rather rough execution, it is only our workshop
Master on.

According to the latest research, it is particularly fertile
the activity of the master as a Madonna painter. But remains of the
many of the Madonna pictures slipped to him, there is only one thing left
can boast of hand-made execution. The Madonna still won't
in Berlin (Fig. 63), a picture that was once at the center of the loud
Quarreling about the artist Verrocchio stood, duly appreciated
neither of its eminent art-historical significance, nor his
according to artistic merits. And yet no other teaches
Blackboard, not even the baptism of Christ, that is the painter's nerves
Verrocchio know as this with biting scorn and compassionate mockery
showered image.

Maria, visible up to her knees, sits in a rocky landscape with the
Children on the lap with its arms stretched out towards its mother. This
The motif is already known from the master's sculptural Madonnas;
only here the child is sitting on the mother's lap and is more restless
shown moving. We find all characteristics in the head of the Madonna
verrocchiesker design, also that gracefully differs from the fine ones
Smiles spreading from the corners of the mouth are not missed. The Christ Child
in its buxom abundance is related to the male fish. With the
The richness of its overlap and the audacity of its foreshortening
puts this child's body from a knowledgeable as well as careful
Master hand testimony.

Even if the first impression of the painting is not necessarily
is more captivating, so it is, similar to the baptism of Christ
the state of conservation. The yellowish incarnate with the heavy ones
brown shadow bothers. Again it is said that the painting is unfinished.
I mean, however, that the glazes have also been rubbed off here and
now the brown background in the meat comes to light. Because
the details are extremely fine, neatly clean: the finely meshed
The fabric of the veil hanging under the child's feet,
the hems on the cherry-red robe, the pattern on the brocade sleeves
the tied laces, the ornament on the heavy wooden disc,
which forms the halo of Mary. In all of this he reveals himself
Artisans.

The bright, metallic shimmering colors indicate the baptism of Christ.
Everything is bright and cool like in the pictures of the Pollajuoli.
The same cold light blue of the coat lining here as there, the same
oriental-colored cloth, which is wound around the child's body here,
there serves as a loincloth for the person to be baptized.

A serious aesthetic reproach clings to the hands of the Berliners
Madonna "with the ugly nails". But they are exactly the same for a short time
cut, black-rimmed nails, which are also found at Botticelli
and who is used to pollajuoli without hesitation. The nail care
is a toilet art still unknown in the Quattrocento. Furthermore
shows the left hand of the, which is only visible in its entire extent
Madonna all the characteristics of the master: secure access, with
three-dimensional sharpness captured outline, the finely modeled wrist,
the folds of skin on the bent thumb joint and the dimple between
the fourth and fifth fingers. The school doesn't often have this hand
Repeat enough, it is also found in the adoration of the
Kings of Leonardo in the Uffizi.

[Illustration: Fig. 63. + Maria with the child. + Berlin, Königl. Museums.
Gemäldegalerie.]

The landscape uses elements that relate to the baptism of Christ
to repeat. The boulder there is from right to left
On the side, and the bit of mountainous land with the bushy one
Tree growth that appears under the Baptist's raised arm
even with the detail of the horn-shaped jagged mountain too
recognized on the Madonna. But one must free oneself from that
Prejudice to see the landscape poet in Verrocchio,
who only appeared with Leonardo. The landscape has only secondary
Meaning in our master's art. It doesn't occur to him, for example
to increase the interest in the landscape through accessories.
It should only liven up the background. On closer inspection you can tell
however, how true Verrocchio remains even in the incidental.
It keeps the distance soft and airy, leaving the outline in the air
flicker in that radiant Italian air, the indefinite
Does not tolerate forms; it becomes plastic and determined after the
Foreground, and yet everything is still discreetly stepping back against that
strong relief of the figurative, which asserts itself undiminished. Just
He lacks the nuance for the delicate intermingling of the reasons
the color and therefore also the maturity of observation. With the
His heart is in the new landscaping direction, the untrue with the
A backdrop system built on top of one another from the Trecento has broken.
His peculiarity, however, saves him from the stereotypically recurring one
Arno Ebene also for his part to discover for himself and her with loyalty
to portray the portraitist.

[Illustration: Fig. 64. + Maria with the child. + Frankfurt a. M.,
Collection of Mr. H. von Mumm.]

The motif of the painting is based on Fra Filippo's so-called four-figure picture
back to the Uffizi. Nonetheless, Verrocchio stayed with everyone
unfree imitation far away. He has also taken off his type of madonna
that of the Frate. The length and width ratios of the
Heads show a striking relationship between the two painters. Also
Trifles are from the very worldly art of
Dominicans have been taken over by Verrocchio: the almost artificial
Arrangement of the veil with horn-like ornamentation that
Preference for jewelry and precious stones. Him to a student because of it
Making Fra Filippo is not acceptable because its picturesque
Expressed, his technique is completely different from that of old Lippi
is different. Should be a teacher in painting for Verrocchio
be made famous, I don't know anyone better than Alesso
To propose Baldovinetti, the savvy experimenter, with whom too
the Pollajuoli went to school. That would be the
Explain stubbornness with which a certain group of art historians
before all the paintings of our master and his school
always insists on the name Pollajuolo. That would also be in
the workshop of Verrocchio's popular motif of the enthroned Madonna
Saints in front of tree-lofted barriers (see fig. 2, 75) on his
true origin.

A whole group of images of the Madonna comes close
of this original work. The motif most accurately takes up a Madonna,
the Herr von Mumm in Frankfurt a. M. owns (Fig. 64). Three others
Panel paintings in Berlin (fig. 65), in London with Mr. Butler and im
Städel Institute in Frankfurt a. M. lean in the composition
more like the Marble Madonna of Bargello. The isolated position
which we (p. 54) assigned to Mr. Shaw's Madonna relief, takes
the Madonna with the Angels in London
(National Gallery No. 296, Fig. 66). All of these paintings stand out
by the conscientious, almost pedantic cleanliness of the technology; your
There is weakness in the soul. You have something rigid in your expression
as well as their folds and their contours touch metallic hardness.
These pictures of the Madonna have recently been cultivated by Francesco Botticini
to assign to a carefully executed but not very peculiar
Master who, without being Verrocchio's immediate assistant, is completely
is under the impression of Verrocchio's work.

Botticini now also belongs to the beautiful altarpiece in the academy
Florence, on which the archangels meet little Tobias with the strange one
Bring the eye balm home to the sick father (Fig. 67). The picture for the
Chapel of Gino Capponi painted in St. Spirito in Florence, already bears
the more common name Botticelli since the sixteenth century;
one understands how easily the mix-up could take place. Fewer
It is understandable how this free, grandly solemn composition
with a master who is nowhere else about tradition and
has got beyond a fearful symmetry. We will
can only explain it by looking at Verrocchio's spiritual part
hold tight and send only the painterly execution to Botticini.

“Young Tobias' hike with an angel or with three
is predominantly, if not exclusively, painted for the home
as a recommendation of a certain youth in the heavenly
Protection "(Burckhardt). Perhaps in our picture one can go to the
think little Alessandro Capponi, the last born of the ten children
of Gino and Maddalena, who went to Lyon at a young age,
to represent the family's commercial interests there. There
then did they put up his picture like him in the family chapel at home
under the guidance of the archangels on the rough paths of the stranger
The way.

[Illustration: Fig. 65. + Maria with the child. + Berlin, Königl. Museums.
Picture gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

The charge offered everything a painter's heart from the second
Half of the Quattrocento. Loud young, graceful ones
Shape. The movement is light and lively, the emotional connection
tender and tender, the robes varied and rich, the landscape
enticing. Not quite this wealth is from the painter's art
been exhausted. The pairwise similarity of the
male types in Michael and Tobias and the female at
Exit Raphael and Gabriel; but there is something about the grace of their faces
Biased, unfree. The hands in which so much in-depth study
verrocchio-like shapes are revealed, repeat themselves several times
in their positions; a pentiment on the hands of the middle group
shows how the painter struggled, the easy interlocking
of the angel and the still shy boy. So fresh and
the two heavenly wingmen urge forward vigorously in the
Middle group stops moving; it is as if they were preventing each other
between his legs compressing wrinkles the archangel striding.
The material is treated with the greatest care and with that light
Joy in the colorful, shiny and ostentatious that the costume designs
of the outgoing Quattrocento is particularly characteristic. The
Wrinkles are expressly allowed to use a pattern from LB Alberti
recommended "moving accessories". For the restless
The fluttering garb of Gabriel appears which once appeared in the gardens of the
Medici, now placed in the first corridor of the Uffizi
antique Pomona (No. 75) to have given the motifs. With devotional
Love are the highlights and reflections on the bare walls
of armor studies; the fist with the mighty one, made of purple velvet
Sheath drawn sword is reflected in the breastplate as well
the fingers gleam on the shiny ball that makes them so delicate
hold. All hems, ruffs, ribbons, laces, buckles and
Locks indicate the hand that takes pleasure in the delicate; also
the ornamented dotted halos indicate this. This is
not Verrocchio himself, but has a very close relationship with him,
just like the sharp outline with the fine edge of light that in hers
Rigidity of curls reminiscent of the allonge wig, the spreading
of the little finger and many other details incessantly
remember him. But Francesco Botticini reveals himself completely in the
Landscape with its atmospheric view of the river plain. they
is exactly like the valley landscape on the great coronation of Mary
in London (No. 1126), the so-called Matteo Palmieri picture, which,
due to a similar confusion of names like our Tobias picture, Sandro
Botticelli was attributed. Baldovinettis lives in this landscape
The role model continued, the Verrocchio in the works that undoubtedly belong to him
is far more independent. The flowers and perennials on the
rocky path are observed with Leonardesque naturalness.
The lizard on the left on the rock is less allowed to enjoy this advantage
to boast. The shaggy mutt, a disdainful offspring, has failed completely
of the "little dog" that the biblical poet gives the traveler to the side.

[Illustration: Fig. 66. + Mary with the child and angels. +

London, National Gallery.]

The solemn solemnity felt by no scheme
restricted composition, also the charm of the landscape below
always use their magic when it comes to the
artistic evaluation of the board. Our style-critical
Discussions will have sufficiently shown how far this effect is
may be linked to Verrocchio's fame. Botticini is never one more
such a work succeeded. From himself we have a pretty weak one,
Replica of the middle group once intended for the Badia in Florence
(Florence, Academy); a second, more imprecise and fleeting, also in
The Morelli Collection at Bergamo has a smaller scale.
Tobias in London (National Gallery No. 781, Fig. 68) is stirring
visible from the same hand as the Madonna located there
with angels (fig. 66). Also for these and all dependent images
Botticini comes into consideration; this sharpness and hardness on the one hand, this
On the other hand, one shouldn't look for sweetness in Verrocchio. Of the
The engraving in Paris made the panel famous (Fig. 69)
Customer, of which only the right part with St. Gabriel get himself
but who certainly reproduced the whole composition, like that of
Tobias cutting in coat ends proves. Its author, the group
belonging to the Baldini beaker, bears the name of the master of the fine
Manner.

The circle of paintings related to Verrocchio,
is not yet closed with this, but that is what is being considered
Anything left over, too loosely related to one's own
masterful hand to take up more space here. Dem
According to objects, most of them fall into a couple of women's heads
Berlin and Vienna. From Tommaso's memorandum we learn
that Andrea for Lorenzo de 'Medici the portrait of Lucrezia de' Donati
who painted the tournament sung by Pulci in honor of Lorenzo in 1469
hosted. The Berlin portrait (Fig. 70) with the equally threatening
like tantalizing inscription: "Don't touch me" on the front
and the hopeless love lament on the back: “Hardly me
possessed, 'I had to cry for it too', however, offers itself to the
Assumption that this is Lorenzo's lover painted by Verrocchio's hand
receive. A delicate romance novel seems to evolve from a saying to
to weave others across. But the painting itself bears, I think,
so clearly all traces of the youthful hand of Lorenzo di Credi,
that competes with the smooth technique of an enamel painter that
the fantasy of the languishing and tormented couple about it
must evaporate. I keep the portrait of a woman in Vienna no less
Prince Liechtenstein (Fig. 20) for the work of a Verrocchio pupil
and none other than that of Leonardo da Vinci (see also p. 46).

[Illustration: Fig. 67. + The Journey of Tobias. + Florence, Academy.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

       * * * * *

Unfortunately, the considerable number of alleged drawings by the master is standing
in inverse proportion to the number of those executed by hand
Leaves. These can be counted among the greatest rarities, like
she also takes first place artistically after the unattainable
Take in hand drawings of Leonardo. Who about in them so-called
Sculpture drawings, only fleetingly the large lines of a composition
presumed defining outline, will be amazed at the unmeasured
Diligence, thorough work-through, with all the momentum of the
Sensation clean line. There is no shortage of fast ones either
Notes of a motive of movement, but then the pen draws the same
delicate and definite lines in the executed study sheets
the charcoal pencil draws on it. Unfortunately, these are some of the most beautiful
Drawings by an inexperienced hand have been passed over, so that
many subtleties are lost forever, and only for the discerning
The shimmer of former beauty still shines on the examiners.

[Illustration: Fig. 68. + The Journey of Tobias. + London, National
Gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

Such blemishes tarnish the impression of that chalk drawing
in the Uffizi with the downward-looking angel's head from which the
Research has to proceed (Fig. 71). A tear through the left side
Patched up hole on the cheek, rough hatching, misunderstood
Addition of the eyelashes, heavy dragging of the lightly
and free curls from the crown, the perforation
the outline for the purpose of the break - all these hardships of later
Hand damage the leaf in the most sensitive way, but still have
cannot touch the magic that is mysterious and difficult in
To interpret words lies above the shapes of this boy's head. Everything
here is charm and innocence: the one half above the flexible neck
sloping curly hair, the downcast eyes, the high, pure one
Forehead, the beautifully moving mouth. This still seems strangely touching
life not unfolded, this still closed soul-bud. On
warm sunbeam, a first triumph, a hidden awareness
Life force - and the smile of the young David flashes too
these still dreamlike children's trains. The snug softness
of the hair on top of the head, its delicate frizz around the head
and neck, the beautifully curved round of the eye bones
delicate shapes of the snub nose, the butterfly-like across the broad
laid face, swaying play of lights with his
The eye follows the illuminated shadow with delight.

It is temptingly close, in this mind, to study one of the
recognize two kneeling angels in the picture with the baptism of Christ
want, all the more so as the drawing bears the holes of the break. But
apart from the fact that this perforation is raw and clumsy and
therefore was by no means made by Verrocchio, the
Similarity between drawing and image is limited.

Related, but less determined in terms of shape and already ans
Grazing sweetish is possessed by an upward looking similar head
by Mr. A. von Beckerath in Berlin (Fig. 72). In the view and
The shape shows a close relationship with the angel on the Madonna
in London (Fig. 66), which is reinforced by the fact that on the
Back of the sheet, unfortunately cut off just below the mouth that
Study of the angel's head on the opposite side of the same picture
is preserved.

A large female head that goes with the Malcolm Collection
British Museum has come to London, remembered in all peculiarities
so striking about the angel's head in the Uffizi that undoubtedly also in
a drawing of Verrocchio lies before us (fig. 73). And his
nicest, how one may sit down. Same technique - black
Chalk on white, slightly ripped paper - the same wide oval
with the high forehead, the same inclination of the head with the lowered ones
Lids, the same, still dreamily closed charm in the expression.
Unfortunately the same condition with rough revisions. The
Hair has been passed over, the outlines reinforced, the shadows partially
blackened.

[Illustration: Fig. 69. Master of the so-called fine manner.
+ Gabriel. +

Copper engraving. Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale.]

Vasari praises “some women heads with beautiful expressions and richer ones
Hairstyle that, because of its beauty, Leonardo da Vinci always
imitated ". Who would doubt that we are in London
Drawing one of these heads? Because the hair trim has that
Artists especially busy here.

The joy of all sorts of fashionable decorations that have been in Florence since
the middle of the fifteenth century
also on the hairstyle. The hair to the allure of back then
to increase the esteemed tall woman's forehead becomes sharp from the face
combed, brushed behind the ears and, intertwined in many ways and
laced up, tucked into a silk cap on the back of the head,
the tips of which cover the ears. That's how almost all the beautiful ones look
Florentine women who Domenico Veneziano painted or who in
the so-called Desiderio busts have been preserved. The whole face remains of
Any hair accessory will be free, even the eyebrows and eyelashes
shaved and torn out with tweezers. The whole mass of the hair
serves as jewelry exclusively for the back of the head. Around 1470 changes
this fashion. The hat releases the hair on the temples, which is now
neatly pinned on in curls or hanging down in loose strands
Cover ears.

[Illustration: Fig. 70. Lorenzo di Credi. + Portrait of a girl. +

Berlin, Königl. Museums. Picture gallery.

(After an original photograph by Franz Hanfstängl in Munich.)]

This is how the woman in the drawing in London wears her hair. The braids,
intertwined and knotted, are with their fine, thin
Ends collected at the height of the crown and there by a clasp
held together; They fall loosely over the temples and ears
wavy down on the shoulders. No wonder Leonardo had that
took as a model. We hear him scientifically do the hairstyle too
sought to fathom. From the eddies that form a water with a steep gradient
around rammed pegs, stimulated his imagination
to new hair styles. By analogy, Leonardo recognized them
Laws according to which hair could be arranged; are they too?
Linguistic terms all refer to the properties of water
taken over.

Verrocchio did not go that far; but you can also see him here as
Forerunners and pioneers, if not as scouts. And still
Leonardo admired a second in these heads: the beauty of the
Expression. The forms are neither slim nor fine; the tenderly nervous
Leonardesque beauties will be looked for in vain. You own one
healthy freshness. But it sounds like that angel's head at the Uffizi
Melody of this soul soft and muffled. Something veiled lies
over this womanly being. The dreamy that so touching
looks downcast eyes, the nobility of pure femininity, who
that forehead shines - that captured Leonardo. Himself
came from a distinguished family, felt a kindred spirit here
addressed. And never again does he remember such figures
abandoned his teacher. It works in some of his early Madonnas
with particular vivacity.

The thorough care that Verrocchio took on the study of the
Child's body related, confirms a sheet used on both sides
in the Louvre, which Morelli has brought in deserved honors.
It shows quick pen drawings of naked boys on both sides
youngest age in various positions. Standing,
sitting, lying, walking, from the front, from the back with the pulled up
Leg, arm raised - the master struggles over and over again
compared to the round, curly model that we have seen in the fish man
and got to know the Terracotta Madonna in the Infant Jesus. There are
motifs quickly caught, as the restlessness of the little ones is necessary
made, only motion notes, ~ notations du geste enfantin ~. Namely
caused by the pulled leg in the front view
Foreshortening occupies the careful master. Everything is only fleeting
indicated; the line of unequal strength, now strong and thick,
now delicate and light, now full of playful grace, now trembling as in
nervous haste. But the rule over the form always asserts itself.
On the back (Fig. 74) a contemporary has something bumpy
Hexameters composed a praise to the master "Varochius",
which makes the drawing unnecessarily documentary
appears secured.

[Illustration: Fig. 71. + Angel's head looking downwards. +

Chalk drawing. Florence, Uffizi Gallery.]

The formal font of this sheet must be kept in mind,
around the main stock of alleged drawings by Verrocchio as a work
of a certain student from the Master's work once and for all
turn off. The twenty-five sheets of pen drawings that are now
in Paris (12), Chantilly (8), Dijon (1), London (2), Berlin (1) and
Hamburg (1) are scattered, once formed, like dimensions, type of paper
and watermarks, a bundle, the so-called sketchbook of
Verrocchio. The vast majority of those previously accumulated in Paris
Leaves suggests that the whole thing, unfortunately, to the
Edges trimmed, once in French private ownership and
Not taken apart and scattered until the nineteenth century
has been.

The sheets are covered on both sides with pen drawings and
also contain numerous draft letters and ~ ricordi ~. The
depicted objects change in the greatest variety
from. Consistent composition ideas emerge: a burial chapel,
a constantly changing Madonna motif, sitting up with the child
the lap, adoring before the boy Jesus, enthroned by an angel
venerated, a resurrection of Christ, figures of saints, individually and
united in groups; then again equestrian and horse studies, boy
Stutzer in a fashionable costume with dogs in the paddock, two cooper,
a coat of arms and naked putti. Some things are reminiscent of certain
Models: a study of nudes based on Verrocchio's David, based on one of the horses
the ancient team of four on the roof of San Marco in Venice
Hercules with the lion skin after Antonio del Pollajuolo, a sea centaur
with a woman after Riccio. Should Verrocchio himself and others
have copied? If you look closer, you are amazed at the rough
and unsteady hand that has guided the pen here. And again:
Verrocchio should have drawn that, especially just before his
Deaths, such as the occasionally noted date 1487 and the reminiscences
to prove Venetian works of art? No doubt we have one
drawing sculptors see before us, but this one in the basic
The one who feels uncertain about body conditions is never the shapely one
Master of the Louvre Leaf.

[Illustration: Fig. 72. + Angel's head looking upwards. +
Chalk drawing.

Berlin, collection of Mr. A. von Beckerath.]

[Illustration: Fig. 73. + female head. + Chalk drawing. London,
British Museum.]

Leads to the maker of these highly questionable achievements
even more certain than the style-critical analysis of content and letter form
of the handwritten records. We find there (on the
Hamburger Blatte) the note of two putti like “that of Andrea
del Verrocchio ”, which Andrea did not list as such
will have. The handwriting itself shows striking resemblance
that of Francesco di Simone (facsimile at Pini). His
We have already touched on close relations with Verrocchio; we know
also that he worked in Venice and that he had a chapel in
S. Giobbe, and finally the sketchbook contains the exact study of the
blessing Christ Child, which Francesco at the tabernacle of the Chiesa di
Monteluce near Perugia (see p. 47). Well also explain
the copies and the lack of independence that a master like Andrea
may not be expected. What to do against Francesco's authorship
has stated that there is a son of the same name in the margin notes
mentioned, while the sons had other names, is highly based
probably due to a read error. So everything is together
in order, as Morelli first did, in the sketchbook the work “one
weak pupil ”, that of Francesco di Simone
is. With the disclosure of these sheets, the drawings of the
Verrocchio limited to those three or four whose quality is glorious
the master comes to equip more than the quantity of the others
ever could.

[Illustration: Fig. 74. + Children's studies. + Pen drawing. Paris, Louvre.

(After a photograph kindly received by Mr. Jean Guiffrey in Paris
provided.)]




XV.


                      ~ el chiaro fonte
  de humanitade e innata gentileza
  che ala pictura et ala sculptura e un ponte
  sopra del quale se passa cum destrezza
  l'alto Andrea del Verrocchio ~ ...

With these verses Giovanni Santi has in his busy rhyming chronicle
proclaims the praise of the "high" Master. And what he can boast about him
found, shows better insight and a more lively sense of art than
the conventional comparison with Lysippus and Phidias, to which the
antiquarian scholarship of Ugolino Verino soared
Has. But the two eulogists agree on one thing. A bridge,
which leads safely across to the promised land of the arts calls him
Giovanni Santi, and Ugolino speaks of the spring from which they all,
"Whose name flies through the Tyrrhenian cities", their skills
have scooped. His contemporaries seem even higher than his works
to have given up his teaching activity. And if there is one
emphatic exaggeration is that in order to be in a parable of time too
talk, more students have emerged from Verrocchio's workshop
as a warrior from the belly of the Trojan horse, his role model and
his teachings have left deep traces and on development
the Florentine art had a lasting effect. The word "student" is allowed
should not be conceived too narrowly, but lies in the direct
artistic offspring only the smaller fame of the Verrocchio workshop
decided. However, like almost everywhere and always, from that
only Leonardo is in sight.

Among these students, Lorenzo di Credi (1459-1537) has the heart
closest to the Master. More than anyone else
Lorenzo was allowed to give him a hand. Contracted by Verrocchio
Accepted work receives credits for independent execution.
When Andrea is in Venice, he visits him several times and equips
detailed workshop reports. Credi inherits the entire artistic
Legacy and he leads the body of the dead master out of the
Lagoon city in the crypt of San Ambrogio.

From the goldsmith's art, just like his master, Lorenzo came to
The artist's workshop at the time when Andrea “~ per un suo
cosi fatto umore ~ ​​“, as Vasari naively says, leaned towards painting.
We have recently learned from documents that Verrocchio has obligations
with the cathedral authorities in Pistoja for the oratorio of the
To deliver a painting to Vergine di Piazza; 1485 becomes the authority
presently, that has not been reportedly for more than six years
to complete the completed picture and from Verrocchio's workshop
to have it brought to its destination. There, in which meanwhile to
Sacrament Chapel converted oratory, houses the painting
still today as a work by Lorenzo di Credi (fig. 75). This is
also undoubtedly the name that must be pronounced in front of the picture.
As for the Forteguerrimonument, so Verrocchio has for the Pistojeser
Dombild just took artistic responsibility, everything
but leave others to Credi. And maybe just did the work
at that tomb the young painter about the completion of the picture
held so that "more than six years later" the official
Memory had to take place. Nothing is gained by assuming
Verrocchio gave Lorenzo the draft, the composition. The
Scheme of the enthroned Madonna with saints in front of marble walls is
the usual in the master's workshop. The execution shows in each
Brushstroke the embarrassingly clean, here still youthful squeamish one
Hand credits. With all delicacy, she rounds the forms and distributes them
the colors up to enamel-like smoothness. The architecture is so good
understood how pleasing the landscape. Verrocchio's design
is reproduced down to the smallest details, but everything is more sober,
more home-made, without panache. The colors are also Verrocchio's
known: a sharp blue, a deep wine red, a cold purple with
Yellow. The goldsmith's patient fingers have this Persian one
Painted carpet. The preservation of the tablet is no less evidence of this
the diligence of execution. To Leonardo, the workshop mate,
reminds the way trees and leaves are dark against a light background
are silhouetted. Also suggests a preserved study in form and
Technique - silver pen on reddish primed paper - inevitable
on Credi: the drawing of St. John the Baptist
Left. A beautiful one in the Dresden Kupferstichkabinet, yes
The revised study of the Madonna is probably also best with
Relate Credi and the Madonna on this first work
(Fig. 76).

The Madonna with St. Leonardus and St. Julian (?) In the museum
zu Naples (Fig. 77) is on the same level of style and shares
poor condition, all characteristics of the Pistojesian picture. Credi
later received several of this in the Verrocchio workshop
made use of the usual compositional scheme. Also in his forms
You can feel the indelible memory until the end of your life
to his master. Credi's children's figurines all hang from Verrocchios
Example. In a carefully executed picture of the penitent
Magdalena in the Berlin Museum he transmits an occasional, through
particularly fine painting excellent statuette Verrocchio,
also in the Berlin Museum (Fig. 78) without any significant change
the wooden panel.

It remains striking that Credi does not have independent sculptural work
has undertaken. Know that he had the necessary prior knowledge
we from the mouth of his master himself. With some certainty have
we also in Credi to the manager of the marble workshop in Pistoja
Time of the construction of the Forteguerri tomb. Meanwhile
there was nothing to be reported about his work there. He has
later picked up the hammer and chisel again, maybe about that
Heraldic shield with the two angels in the great hall of the
Chisel town house of Pistoja (Fig. 79), a work exceedingly
shows clear relationships with the school of Verrocchio and in the
Cleanliness of the marble treatment as in the occasional clumsiness
of the composition, the artist who performed the tomb in the
close cathedral suggests.

[Illustration: Fig. 75. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna with Johannes dem
Baptist and St. Zeno. + Pistoja, Dom.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

What does Verrocchio like about this hard-working but artistically unproductive
Talent to have drawn to this star with borrowed light? Was
it is that "pure source of kindness and tender feeling",
which Giovanni Santi praises? Or the attachment, adoration and
Loyalty, here as often the smaller talent to the beloved master
proven? What human could have linked the two is
lost in the silence of history; not even one of those
cheap artist anecdotes plays with uncertain light over the
away from both figures. Only what united them artistically can still do
be recognized. And then the experience repeats itself that the great
Masters who are conscientious handlers are often closer than ingenious ones
Student. Especially the manual side of the art exercise, the technical one
Credi was well aware of the skill that Verrocchio placed so much importance on
to acquire with a care bordering on the pedantic. Vasari, the
Credi has known personally, tells how hardly larger pictures
came from his easel, since even the smaller give him limitless
Made trouble. He has to respond to Verrocchio's technical experiments
have had a careful eye; until his maturity he tried to
to steadily increase the durability and smoothness of its colors.
He succeeded in this to a greater degree than the products
his brush make it appear absolutely desirable. Like him
himself, only died of old age in 1537, so is his
Art, which you never notice the Cinquecento, to old age
Gone fundamental. His fame lies in his relationship with Verrocchio,
in his devotion, which was as unconditional as his reliability.

[Illustration: Fig. 76. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna study. +
Silver pen drawing.

Dresden, Kupferstich-Kabinett.]

Just as little is the originality of Francesco di Simone, his
Traces we have met so often in the work of Verrocchio. To a
Francesco is a little younger than Verrocchio in years
Completed an apprenticeship in the Andreas workshop. His main work, the
Marble tomb of the lawyer Tartagni in San Domenico in Bologna
(1477; Fig. 44), is in the structure and ornamentation by Desiderio
depending, in the figurative and in the folds it shows the model
of Verrocchio to the point of becoming dependent and with almost all faults,
which the overzealous imitator never escapes. The work is clean and
conscientious to the point of pettiness. One can hardly speak of invention
and the ornamental overload shows no finer one
Taste. The same defects affect the rest of the work
of the sculptor, whose association with Verrocchio personally and
artistically was looser than the relationship with Credi.

[Illustration: Fig. 77. Lorenzo di Credi. + Madonna with two saints. +

Naples, museum.

(After an original photograph by the Alinari brothers in Florence.)]

The works in baked clay carried out by the hand of Agnolo di
Polo were seen everywhere in Florence, we can, maybe the
Due to the instability of their material, no longer prove. Some
Replacement, however, in order to ensure that Verrocchio's aftermath on Florence was entirely
Observing the peculiar field of plastic art offers one
certain group of Robbia works. Madonnas in puffy robes
and coat, the Christ Child on a pillow next to him, flown around by
the angels of Forteguerri's grave, repetitions of entire compositions
Verrocchios, the baptism of Christ, the beheading of John, the
Thomas miracle, putti that are related by blood to those of Verrocchio,
are found in this category. They lead in terms of art history
into the studio of the last of the three Robbia masters, Giovannis, and
speak rather for the popularity of the originals used than that they
exposed the ingenuity of the imitator. With this work
Second and third hand, Verrocchio's art is popular
become. They are more common in the provinces than in Florence
itself. It is as if the "prosperous city" had an abundance of it
given away, with it also the most modest village church between the
Vineyards of the Arno plain, the most remote monastery on the ridge of the
The mountains have a part in the marvelous growth within their walls.

Again and again, however, one comes across painters when one looks at Verrocchios
Want to overlook acting as a teacher in full. In Botticellis
Youth development he is the deciding factor, and Ghirlandaio
comes under rule with his first steps
Verrocchiesker shapes and compositions. That proves how well known
and must have been the painting workshop of our master,
that workshop where the technical experiment, priming and
Rubbing the colors, their mixture and luminosity, in short everything for
Craftsmen operated with such scientific thoroughness
became that apparently the production of the master himself about it
came up short.

Not just the local artists, but also the wandering artists
has recorded this planting site of detailed technical studies.
Florence formed especially for the neighboring Umbrian masters
the college of artistic creation that nobody can pass by
should. The long-standing relationship between Perugia and
Florence was particularly close in the Quattrocento. So was
for also the young Perugino from his first master in art
it was always pointed out: nowhere else than in Florence lived so many
excellent masters, especially so many capable painters. The that
said Fiorenzo di Lorenzo had, to judge by his works,
the blessing of the Florentine school, especially the suggestion of
Verrocchio here, experienced in yourself. Perugino followed his advice,
and what he learned under Verrocchio forms the iron structure of his
Ability, so firmly settled in him that it is also about the sad
Slingshot work of his later period has not been lost
is. Perugino's Madonnas with the demurely downcast eyes that
typical foot position of his saints, the spread hand movements,
the arrangement of the cloak over the robe, his naked children with
the limbs "turned as if on a lathe" - all of this is possible
back to Verrocchio as well as his emptiness over the years
Pathos sinks to the caricature of a masterly virtue.

[Illustration: Fig. 78. + The atoning Magdalena. +

Clay statuette, old painted and gilded.

Berlin, Königl. Museums.]

With Credi and Perugino he is finally staying in Verrocchios
Workshop to which the word Dante from Homer applies “~ sovra gili
altri com 'aquila vola ~ “: Leonardo da Vinci. Vasari knew what
he did when he was introducing this undeniably greatest
Italian artist started a new section of his biographical
Work began. The Proömium with which Vasari this new third part
introduces, describes in a quick retrospect once again the laborious one
Up; then the wide summit view opens up over the promised land
the high renaissance. And as the first figure of a fully developed
High renaissance master Leonardo appears. His merits will be
Put in the brightest light: the supernatural grace, the inspiration of the
Shape, the rich abundance of forms, the delicate melt of the color.
No reference to Verrocchio, with whom everything is like in germ cells
is preformed. No praise to this master, whose greatest fame it
henceforth it remains to have trained such a student. With
a feeling of elation, as if he had taken an active part, says Vasari
overcoming "that dry, sharp and hard method" of
Quattrocento artists with their almost headstrong penchant for the difficult
Executable and often unpleasant too. This artistically
Vasari’s judgment of Verrocchio is only one-sided
understandable: here I have study and hard work like no other
Artists who made up for shortcomings in natural talent.

[Illustration: Fig. 79. Verrocchio's workshop. + Angel with the +
(broken) + coat of arms of the city of Pistoja +. Marble. In the great hall of the
Town house in Pistoja.]

To the historian the one, Verrocchio, appears only to be unconditional
Preliminary stage to the other, Leonardo, because nature doesn't make leaps.
What started with the teacher is developing into full bloom
at the student. It is often as if Verrocchio's entire art world was one
Microcosm of Leonardo's artistic universe. We got from the
scientific studies Andreas heard of his employment
with the music, his thorough technical knowledge on all
Areas of artistic creation and we understand that only in his
Workshop Leonardo's genius could find the right breeding ground.

For such a lively, restlessly searching mind like Leonardo, however, offered
this workshop and this teacher are also dangerous. The manifold
the incoming orders attracted the curiosity of a technical one
Area over to the other. Verrocchios in all matters of
Handicraft pedantic thoroughness was passed on to Leonardo,
but at the same time a capricious fragmentation of the labor force,
a tendency towards theoretical brooding, technical speculation.

About a more intimate personal relationship between the artists
nothing is reported. But if Leonardo was still in the guild
registered master stays with Verrocchio for years, so
may, also considering Leonardo's amiable manners,
to be concluded on a good agreement, which Vasari for free with
tried to tarnish the jealousy of the elder. The artistic
The connection between the two has been so close that criticism is still frequent today
it is unclear to whom of them certain indistinguishable works
must belong.

For our purpose, however, the question of dependence arises
Leonardus von Verrocchio back against the after the retroactive effect of
brilliant pupil on his surroundings.

For the young people who worked with Leonardo at Verrocchio,
such an artistic reaction is certain. Without Leonardos
In spite of Verrocchio, neither Credi nor Perugino would be role models
become what we know them to be. But now the master himself?
The facts are strangely luring. Before Leonardo's entry into the workshop
we cannot date a single work by Verrocchio, with one exception
maybe of David's. Then with the outcome of the sixties continues
the proud row one in hardly interrupted sequence, with increasing
artistic freedom, from the delicate to the graceful, from the graceful
to the great. An overcoming that ascends from level to level
the ~ maniera alquanto dura e crudetta ~ can be determined
The parallels with Leonardo become more and more numerous. Should this
from work to work free and deepened art of unfolding
busy master with the surprisingly long stay
Leonardo's workshop until 1480 without any causal connection?

Again and again, especially from the French side, there is such a thing
Context, that is to say, a constantly growing dependency
Verrocchios has been asserted by Leonardo's artistic ideals.
Hopefully the previous chapters have been very wrong
presented. Verrocchio's development is so natural that
so compellingly logical solely from his artistic disposition that
an intervention by the higher genius Leonardos unnecessary, even inappropriate
appears. Anyone who does not think they can do without one has
like a bad dramatic poet, the character of his hero
kinked instead of developing it consistently in an ascending line.

What wrestles in Verrocchio's art and wants to free itself without them
To be able to completely shed the shackles, this uncommon spirit, the “after
strived for a stricter and deeper justification ”- that is exactly what I wanted
makes it understandable and lovable to us Germans. It's this one
Chaining strong talent with almost scientific brooding that
Has always been a feature of German art. Such talents
searching workers, do not create primarily for those who enjoy,
as she does not find satisfaction even in sheer beautiful appearance
Find. They drag heavily on their thoughts. Even in the best case
are they a transition, a bridge, ~ un ponte sopra del quale se
passa cum destrezza ~ as the old Giovanni Santi wrote. they
are plowman and sower, the sowing of which depends on the soil
that she falls. If this soil was fertile arable land, then their lot is theirs
to step back like the farmer, the one of the well-cultivated field
The hour of the bell rings home.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Verrocchio, by Hans Mackowsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VERROCCHIO ***

***** This file should be named 63924-0.txt or 63924-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/9/2/63924/

Produced by Peter Becker, Reiner Ruf, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one - the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away - you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark / copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-TM electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. lake
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-TM electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation "or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
All references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-TM name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
Immediate access to the full Project Gutenberg-TM License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII "or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  Payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Gutenberg Project
  Literary Archive Foundation. "

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s / he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinued
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund "described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
Receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-TM is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection wants
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501 (c) (3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Gutenberg Literary Project
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Gutenberg Project
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-TM depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($ 1 to $ 5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-TM concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
